{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3541535", "text": "Infradian rhythm\n\nIn chronobiology, an infradian rhythm is a rhythm with a period longer than the period of a circadian rhythm, i.e. with a frequency less than one cycle in 28 hours, such as menstruation, breeding, tidal or seasonal rhythms. In contrast, ultradian rhythms have periods shorter than the period of a circadian rhythm.\n\n", "id": "3541535", "title": "Infradian rhythm"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5635076", "text": "Syntrophy\n\nSyntrophy, synthrophy, cross-feeding, or cross feeding [Greek \"syn\" meaning together, \"trophe\" meaning nourishment] is the phenomenon that one species lives off the products of another species. In this association, the growth of one partner is improved, or depends on the nutrients, growth factors or substrate provided by the other partner. Jan Dolfing described syntrophy as \"the critical interdependency between producer and consumer\". This term for nutritional interdependence is often used in microbiology to describe this symbiotic relationship between bacterial species. Morris \"et al\". have described the process as \"obligately mutualistic metabolism\".\n\nSyntrophy plays an important role in a large number of microbial processes.\n\nThe defining feature of ruminants, such as cows and goats, is a stomach called a rumen. The rumen contains billions of microbes, many of which are syntrophic. One excellent example of this syntrophy is interspecies hydrogen transfer. Some anaerobic fermenting microbes in the rumen (and other gastrointestinal tracts) are capable of degrading organic matter to short chain fatty acids, and hydrogen. The accumulating hydrogen inhibits the microbe's ability to continue degrading organic matter, but syntrophic hydrogen-consuming microbes allow continued growth by metabolizing the waste products. In addition, fermentative bacteria gain maximum energy yield when protons are used as electron acceptor with concurrent H production. Hydrogen-consuming organisms include methanogens, sulfate-reducers, acetogens, and others. Some fermentation products, such as fatty acids longer than two carbon atoms, alcohols longer than one carbon atom, and branched-chain and aromatic fatty acids, cannot directly be used in methanogenesis. In acetogenesis process, these products are oxidized to acetate and H by obligated proton reducing bacteria in syntrophic relationship with methanogenic archaea as low H partial pressure is essential for acetogenic reactions to be thermodynamically favorable (ΔG < 0). (Stams et al., 2005)\n\nThe number of bacterial cells that live on or in the human body, for example throughout the alimentary canal and on the skin, is in the region of 10 times the total number of human cells in it. These microbes are vital, for instance for the digestive and the immune system to function.\n\nAnother example is the many organisms that feed on faeces or dung. A cow diet consists mainly of grass, the cellulose of which is transformed into lipids by micro-organisms in the cow's large intestine. These micro-organisms cannot use the lipids because of lack of oxygen in the intestine, so the cow does not take up all lipids produced. When the processed grass leaves the intestine as dung and comes into open air, many organisms, such as the dung beetle, feed on it.\n\nYet another example is the community of micro-organisms in soil that live off leaf litter. Leaves typically last one year and are then replaced by new ones. These micro-organisms mineralize the discarded leaves and release nutrients that are taken up by the plant. Such relationships are called reciprocal syntrophy because the plant lives off the products of micro-organisms. Many symbiotic relationships are based on syntrophy.\n\nSyntrophic microbial food webs can play an integral role in the breakdown of organic pollutants such as oils, aromatic compounds, and amino acids.\n\nEnvironmental contamination with oil is of high ecological importance, but can be mediated through syntrophic degradation. Alkanes are hydrocarbon chains that are the major chemical component of crude oils, and have been experimentally verified to be broken down by syntrophic microbial food webs. The hydrocarbons of the oil are broken down after activation by fumarate, a chemical compound that is regenerated by other microorganisms. Without regeneration, the microbes degrading the oil would eventually run out of fumarate and the process would cease. This breakdown is crucial in the processes of bioremediation and global carbon cycling.\n\nSyntrophic microbial communities are key players in the breakdown of aromatic compounds, which are common pollutants. The degradation of aromatic benzoate to methane produces many intermediate compounds such as formate, acetate, CO2 and H2. The build up of these products makes benzoate degradation progressively less favourable. These intermediates can then be taken up and metabolized syntrophically by methanogens to make the whole process more thermodynamically favourable.\n\nStudies have shown that bacterial degradation of amino acids can be significantly enhanced through the process of syntrophy. Microbes growing poorly on amino acid substrates alanine, aspartate, serine, leucine, valine, and glycine can have their rate of growth dramatically increased by syntrophic H2 scavengers. These scavengers, like \"Methanospirillum and Acetobacterium,\" metabolize the H2 waste produced during amino acid breakdown, preventing a toxic build-up. Another way to improve amino acid breakdown is through interspecies electron transfer mediated by formate. Species like \"Desulfovibrio\" employ this method.\n\nThe main motive behind a syntrophic relation between two bacterial organisms is generalized as a relationship where each participant's metabolic activity cannot independently overcome the thermodynamic pressure of the reaction under standard conditions even when a cosubstrate or nutrient is added into the environment. Therefore, the cooperation of the other participant is required to reduce the intermediate pool size.\nThe \"Methanobacillus omelianskii\" culture is a classic example in demonstrating how two separate unfavourable reactions can be carried out by syntrophic interactions. Strain S and strain M.o.H of \"Methanobacillus omelianskii\" oxidize ethanol into acetate and methane by a process called interspecies hydrogen transfer. Individuals of strain S are observed as obligate anaerobic bacteria that use ethanol as an electron donor, whereas organisms of strain M.o.H are methanogens that oxidize hydrogen gas to produce methane. These two metabolic reactions can be shown as follows:\n<br>\nComplex organic compounds such as ethanol, propionate, butyrate, and lactate cannot be directly used as substrates for methanogenesis by methanogens. On the other hand, fermentation of these organic compounds cannot occur in fermenting microorganisms unless the hydrogen concentration is reduced to a low level by the methanogens. In this case, hydrogen, an electron-carrying compound (mediator) is transported from the fermenting bacteria to the methanogen through a process called mediated interspecies electron transfer (MIET), where the mediator is carried down a concentration gradient created by a thermodynamically favourable coupled redox reaction.\n", "id": "5635076", "title": "Syntrophy"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6920635", "text": "Biological constraints\n\nBiological constraints are factors which make populations resistant to evolutionary change. One proposed definition of constraint is \"A property of a trait that, although possibly adaptive in the environment in which it originally evolved, acts to place limits on the production of new phenotypic variants.\" Constraint has played an important role in the development of such ideas as homology and body plans.\n\nAny aspect of an organism that has not changed over a certain period of time could be considered to provide evidence for \"constraint\" of some sort. To make the concept more useful, it is therefore necessary to divide it into smaller units. First, one can consider the pattern of constraint as evidenced by phylogenetic analysis and the use of phylogenetic comparative methods; this is often termed phylogenetic inertia, or phylogenetic constraint. It refers to the tendency of related taxa sharing traits based on phylogeny. Charles Darwin spoke of this concept in his 1859 book \"On the Origin of Species\", as being \"Unity of Type\" and went on to explain the phenomenon as existing because organisms do not start over from scratch, but have characteristics that are built upon already existing ones that were inherited from their ancestors; and these characteristics likely limit the amount of evolution seen in that new taxa due to these constraints. \n\nIf one sees particular features of organisms that have not changed over rather long periods of time (many generations), then this could suggest some constraint on their ability to change (evolve). However, it is not clear that mere documentation of lack of change in a particular character is good evidence for constraint in the sense of the character being unable to change. For example, long-term stabilizing selection related to stable environments might cause stasis. It has often been considered more fruitful, to consider constraint in its causal sense: what are the causes of lack of change?\n\nThe most common explanation for biological constraint is that stabilizing selection acts on an organism to prevent it changing, for example, so that it can continue to function in a tightly-defined niche. This may be considered to be a form of external constraint, in the sense that the organism is constrained not by its makeup or genetics, but by its environment. The implication would be that if the population was in a new environment, its previously constrained features would potentially begin to evolve.\n\nRelated to the idea of stabilizing selection is that of the requirement that organisms function adequately in their environment. Thus, where stabilizing selection acts because of the particular niche that is occupied, mechanical and physico-chemical constraints act in a more general manner. For example, the acceleration caused by gravity places constraints on the minimum bone density and strength for an animal of a particular size. Similarly, the properties of water mean that tissues must have certain osmotic properties in order to function properly.\n\nFunctional coupling takes the idea that organisms are integrated networks of functional interactions (for example, the vertebral column of vertebrates is involved in the muscle, nerve, and vascular systems as well as providing support and flexibility) and therefore cannot be radically altered without causing severe functional disruption. This may be viewed as one type of trade-off. As Rupert Riedl pointed out, this degree of functional constraint — or burden — generally varies according to position in the organism. Structures literally in the centre of the organism — such as the vertebral column — are often more burdened than those at the periphery, such as hair or toes.\n\nThis class of constraint depends on certain types of phenotype not being produced by the genotype (compare stabilizing selection, where there is no constraint on what is produced, but rather on what is naturally selected). For example, for a highly homozygous organism, the degree of observed phenotypic variability in its descendents would be lower than those of a heterozygous one. Similarly, developmental systems may be highly canalised, to prevent the generation of certain types of variation.\n\nAlthough they are separate, the types of constraints discussed are nevertheless relatable to each other. In particular, stabilizing selection, mechanical, and physical constraints might lead through time to developmental integration and canalisation. However, without any clear idea of any of these mechanisms, deducing them from mere patterns of stasis as deduced from phylogenetic patterns or the fossil record remains problematic. In addition, the terminology used to describe constraints has led to confusion.\n\n\n", "id": "6920635", "title": "Biological constraints"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2686634", "text": "Polyphenism\n\nA polyphenic trait is a trait for which multiple, discrete phenotypes can arise from a single genotype as a result of differing environmental conditions. It is therefore a special case of phenotypic plasticity.\n\nThere are several types of polyphenism in animals, from having sex determined by the environment to the castes of honey bees and other social insects. Some polyphenisms are seasonal, as in some butterflies which have different patterns during the year, and some Arctic animals like the snowshoe hare and Arctic fox, which are white in winter. Other animals have predator-induced or resource polyphenisms, allowing them to exploit variations in their environment. Some nematode worms can develop either into adults or into resting dauer larvae according to resource availability.\n\nA polyphenism is a biological mechanism that causes a trait to be polyphenic. For example, crocodiles possess a sex-determining polyphenism, and therefore their gender is a polyphenic trait.\n\nWhen polyphenic forms exist at the same time in the same panmictic (interbreeding) population they can be compared to genetic polymorphism. With polyphenism the switch between morphs is environmental, but with genetic polymorphism the determination of morph is genetic. These two cases have in common that more than one morph is part of the population at any one time. This is rather different from cases where one morph predictably follows another during, for instance, the course of a year. In essence the latter is normal ontogeny where young forms can and do have different forms, colours and habits to adults.\n\nThe discrete nature of polyphenic traits differentiates them from traits like weight and height, which are also dependent on environmental conditions but vary continuously across a spectrum. When a polyphenism is present, an environmental cue causes the organism to develop along a separate pathway, resulting in distinct morphologies; thus, the response to the environmental cue is “all or nothing.” The nature of these environmental conditions varies greatly, and includes seasonal cues like temperature and moisture, pheromonal cues, kairomonal cues (signals released from one species that can be recognized by another), and nutritional cues.\n\nSex-determining polyphenisms allow a species to benefit from sexual reproduction while permitting an unequal gender ratio. This can be beneficial to a species because a large female-to-male ratio maximizes reproductive capacity. However, temperature-dependent sex determination (as seen in crocodiles) limits the range in which a species can exist, and makes the species susceptible to endangerment by changes in weather pattern. Temperature-dependent sex determination has been proposed as an explanation for the extinction of the dinosaurs.\n\nPopulation-dependent and reversible sex determination, found in animals such as the blue wrasse fish, have less potential for failure. In the blue wrasse, only one male is found in a given territory: larvae within the territory develop into females, and adult males will not enter the same territory. If a male dies, one of the females in his territory becomes male, replacing him. While this system ensures that there will always be a mating couple when two animals of the same species are present, it could potentially decrease genetic variance in a population, for example if the females remain in a single male's territory.\n\nThe caste system of insects enables eusociality, the division of labor between non-breeding and breeding individuals. A series of polyphenisms determines whether larvae develop into queens, workers, and, in some cases soldiers. In the case of the ant, \"P. morrisi\", an embryo must develop under certain temperature and photoperiod conditions in order to become a reproductively-active queen. This allows for control of the mating season but, like sex determination, limits the spread of the species into certain climates.\nIn bees, royal jelly provided by worker bees causes a developing larva to become a queen. Royal jelly is only produced when the queen is aging or has died. This system is less subject to influence by environmental conditions, yet prevents unnecessary production of queens.\n\nPolyphenic pigmentation is adaptive for insect species that undergo multiple mating seasons each year. Different pigmentation patterns provide appropriate camouflage throughout the seasons, as well as alter heat retention as temperatures change. Because insects cease growth and development after eclosion, their pigment pattern is invariable in adulthood: thus, a polyphenic pigment adaptation would be less valuable for species whose adult form survives longer than one year.\n\nBirds and mammals are capable of continued physiological changes in adulthood, and some display reversible seasonal polyphenisms, such as in the Arctic fox, which becomes all white in winter as snow camouflage.\n\nPredator-induced polyphenisms allow the species to develop in a more reproductively-successful way in a predator's absence, but to otherwise assume a more defensible morphology. However, this can fail if the predator evolves to stop producing the kairomone to which the prey responds. For example, the fly larvae that feed on \"Daphnia cucullata\" (a water flea) release a kairomone that \"Daphnia\" can detect. When the fly larvae are present, \"Daphnia\" grow large helmets that protect them from being eaten. However, when the predator is absent, \"Daphnia\" have smaller heads and are therefore more agile swimmers.\n\nOrganisms with resource polyphenisms show alternative phenotypes that allow differential use of food or other resources. One example is the western spadefoot toad, which maximizes its reproductive capacity in temporary desert ponds. While the water is at a safe level, the tadpoles develop slowly on a diet of other opportunistic pond inhabitants. However, when the water level is low and desiccation is imminent, the tadpoles develop a morphology (wide mouth, strong jaw) that permits them to cannibalize. Cannibalistic tadpoles receive better nutrition and thus metamorphose more quickly, avoiding death as the pond dries up.\n\nAmong invertebrates, the nematode \"Pristionchus pacificus\" has one morph that primarily feeds on bacteria and a second morph that produces large teeth, enabling it to feed on other nematodes, including competitors for bacterial food. In this species, cues of starvation and crowding by other nematodes, as sensed by pheromones, trigger a hormonal signal that ultimately activates a developmental switch gene that specifies formation of the predatory morph.\n\nDensity-dependent polyphenism allows species to show a different phenotype based on the population density in which it was reared. In Lepidoptera, African armyworm larvae exhibit one of two appearances: the gregarious or solitary phase. Under crowded or \"gregarious\" conditions, the larvae have black bodies and yellow stripes along their bodies. However, under solitary conditions, they have green bodies with a brown stripe down their backs. The different phenotypes emerge during the third instar and remain until the last instar. \n\nUnder conditions of stress such as crowding and high temperature, L2 larvae of some free living nematodes such as \"Caenorhabditis elegans\" can switch development to the so-called dauer larva state, instead of going the normal molts into a reproductive adult. These dauer larvae are a stress-resistant, non-feeding, long-lived stage, enabling the animals to survive harsh conditions. On return to favorable conditions, the animal resumes reproductive development from L3 stage onwards.\n\nA mechanism has been proposed for the evolutionary development of polyphenisms:\n\n\nEvolution of novel polyphenisms through this mechanism has been demonstrated in the laboratory. Suzuki and Nijhout used an existing mutation (\"black\") in a monophenic green hornworm (\"Manduca sexta\") that causes a black phenotype. They found that if larvae from an existing population of \"black\" mutants were raised at 20˚C, then all the final instar larvae were black; but if the larvae were instead raised at 28˚C, the final instar larvae ranged in color from black to green. By selecting for larvae that were black if raised at 20˚C but green if raised at 28˚C, they produced a polyphenic strain after thirteen generations.\n\nThis fits the model described above because a new mutation (black) was required to reveal pre-existing genetic variation and to permit selection. Furthermore, the production of a polyphenic strain was only possible because of background variation within the species: two alleles, one temperature-sensitive and one stable, were present for a single gene upstream of \"black\" (in the pigment production pathway) before selection occurred. The temperature-sensitive allele was not observable because at high temperatures, it caused an increase in green pigment in hornworms that were already bright green. However, introduction of the black mutant caused the temperature-dependent changes in pigment production to become obvious. The researchers could then select for larvae with the temperature-sensitive allele, resulting in a polyphenism.\n\n\n", "id": "2686634", "title": "Polyphenism"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=277810", "text": "Trace metal\n\nTrace metals are the metals subset of trace elements; that is, metals normally present in small but measurable amounts in animal and plant cells and tissues and that are a necessary part of nutrition and physiology. Many biometals are trace metals. Ingestion of, or exposure to, excessive quantities can be toxic. However, insufficient plasma or tissue levels of certain trace metals can cause pathology, as is the case with iron.\n\nTrace metals within the human body include iron, lithium, zinc, copper, chromium, nickel, cobalt, vanadium, molybdenum, manganese and others.\n\nTrace metals are metals needed by living organisms to function properly and are depleted through the expenditure of energy by various metabolic processes of living organisms. They are replenished in animals through diet as well as environmental exposure, and in plants through the uptake of nutrients from the soil in which the plant grows. Human vitamin pills and plant fertilizers can be a source of trace metals.\n\nTrace metals are sometimes referred to as trace elements, although the latter includes minerals and is a broader category. See also Dietary mineral. Trace elements are required by the body for specific functions. Things such as vitamins, sports drinks, fresh fruits and vegetables are sources. Taken in excessive amounts, trace elements can cause problems. For example fluorine is required for the formation of bones and enamel on teeth. However, when taken in an excessive amount can cause a disease called \"Fluorosis', in which bone deformations and yellowing of teeth are seen. Fluorine can occur naturally in some areas in ground water.\n\nTrace metals include iron that can help to prevent anemia, and zinc that is a cofactor in over 100 enzyme reactions.\n", "id": "277810", "title": "Trace metal"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10869371", "text": "Supercompensation\n\nIn sports science theory, supercompensation is the post training period during which the trained function/parameter has a higher performance capacity than it did prior to the training period.\n\nThe fitness level of a human body in training can be broken down into four periods: initial fitness, parietal fitness training, recovery, and supercompensation. During the initial fitness period, the target of the training has a base level of fitness (shown by the first time sector in the graph). Upon entering the training period, the target's level of fitness decreases (shown by the second time sector in the graph). After training, the body enters the recovery period during which level of fitness increases up to the initial fitness level (shown by the third time sector in the graph). Because the human body is an adjustable organism, it will feel the need to adjust itself to a higher level of fitness in anticipation of the next training session. Accordingly, the increase in fitness following a training session does not stop at the initial fitness level. Instead the body enters a period of supercompensation during which fitness surpasses the initial fitness level (shown by the fourth time sector in the graph). If there are no further workouts, this fitness level will slowly decline back towards the initial fitness level (shown by the last time sector in the graph). First put forth by Russian scientist Nikolai N. Yakovlev (1911–1992) in 1949-1959, this theory is a basic principle of athletic training.\n\nIf the next workout takes place during the recovery period, overtraining may occur. If the next workout takes place during the supercompensation period, the body will advance to a higher level of fitness. If the next workout takes place after the supercompensation period, the body will remain at the base level.\n\nMore complex variations are possible; for instance, sometimes a few workouts are intentionally made in the recovery period to achieve greater supercompensation effects.\n\nAt a first glance, creating effective training programs might look simple. All you need is to determine the intensity level and how long it takes you to get to the supercompensation period. Afterwards, continue training with the intensity level that was determined previously and keep the necessary intervals between workouts required for supercompensation. However, things become more complex because training affects many different bodily functions and parameters. Each bodily function or parameter has a different recovery time, a different amount of time needed to reach peak supercompensation, a different amount of time between supercompensation peak and return to base fitness.\n\nThe aforementioned functions and parameters are basic ones. Muscle strength and mass are complex parameters. For instance, muscle mass is a function of many different simple parameters. For example, amount of glycogen in muscles is a basic parameter that influences muscle mass.\n\nIn classical sport science, the yearly (sometimes multi-yearly) period is divided to micro and macro cycles, where each microcycle is responsible for the development of a specific (sometimes several) basic training function and parameter, whereas macrocycles are responsible for the development of complex parameters/functions (such as muscle strength). During each microcycle, the resting period is the same as the amount of time needed for reaching the supercompensation stage of the current training parameter/function (also during such a micro cycle there shouldn't be any negative influence on the recovery of the main function). Such a training method will work only when the developed functions/parameters are non-related. Unfortunately, for muscle strength and mass this is not the case (functions/parameters are related). Therefore, for muscle strength and mass different approaches are needed. During a training cycle the intensity and volume of training varies, waves of different functions are overlaid so that until the end of the microcycle supercompensation of the main required functions is achieved.\n\n", "id": "10869371", "title": "Supercompensation"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11801835", "text": "Kin recognition\n\nKin recognition, also called kin detection, is an organism's ability to distinguish between close genetic kin and non-kin. In evolutionary biology and psychology, such an ability is presumed to have evolved for inbreeding avoidance.\n\nAn additional adaptive function sometimes posited for kin recognition is a role in kin selection. There is debate over this, since in strict theoretical terms kin recognition is not necessary for kin selection or the cooperation associated with it. Rather, social behaviour can emerge by kin selection in the demographic conditions of 'viscous populations' with organisms interacting in their natal context, without active kin discrimination, since social participants by default typically share recent common origin. Since kin selection theory emerged, much research has been produced investigating the possible role of kin recognition mechanisms in mediating altruism. Taken as a whole, this research suggests that active powers of recognition play a negligible role in mediating social cooperation relative to less elaborate cue-based and context-based mechanisms, such as familiarity, imprinting and phenotype matching.\n\nBecause cue-based 'recognition' predominates in social mammals, outcomes are non-deterministic in relation to actual genetic kinship, instead outcomes simply reliably correlate with genetic kinship in an organism's typical conditions. A well-known human example of an inbreeding avoidance mechanism is the Westermarck effect, in which unrelated individuals who happen to spend their childhood in the same household find each other sexually unattractive. Similarly, due to the cue-based mechanisms that mediate social bonding and cooperation, unrelated individuals who grow up together in this way are also likely to demonstrate strong social and emotional ties, and enduring altruism.\n\nThe English evolutionary biologist W. D. Hamilton's theory of inclusive fitness, and the related theory of kin selection, were formalized in the 1960s and 1970s to explain the evolution of social behaviours. Hamilton's early papers, as well as giving a mathematical account of the selection pressure, discussed possible implications and behavioural manifestations. Hamilton considered potential roles of cue-based mechanisms mediating altruism versus 'positive powers' of kin discrimination:\n\nThese two possibilities, altruism mediated via 'passive situation' or via 'sophisticated discrimination', stimulated a generation of researchers to look for evidence of any 'sophisticated' kin discrimination. However, Hamilton later (1987) developed his thinking to consider that \"an innate kin recognition adaptation\" was unlikely to play a role in mediating altruistic behaviours:\n\nThe implication that the inclusive fitness criterion can be met by mediating mechanisms of cooperative behaviour that are context and location-based has been clarified by recent work by West \"et al.\":\n\nFor a recent review of the debates around kin recognition and their role in the wider debates about how to interpret inclusive fitness theory, including its compatibility with ethnographic data on human kinship, see Holland (2012).\n\nLeading inclusive fitness theorists such as Grafen have argued that the whole research program around kin recognition is somewhat misguided:\n\nOthers have cast similar doubts over the enterprise:\n\nKin recognition is a behavioral adaptation noted in many species but proximate level mechanisms are not well documented. Recent studies have shown that kin recognition can result from a multitude of sensory input. Jill Mateo notes that there are three components are prominent in kin recognition. First, \"production of unique phenotypic cues or labels\". Second, \"perception of these labels and the degree of correspondence of these labels with a 'recognition template'\", and finally the recognition of the phenotypes should lead to \"action taken by the animal as a function of the perceived similarity between its template and an encountered phenotype\".\n\nThe three components allow for several possible mechanisms of kin recognition. Sensory information gathered from visual, olfactory and auditory stimuli are the most prevalent. The belding ground squirrel kin produce similar odors in comparison to non-kin. Mateo notes that the squirrels spent longer investigating non-kin scents suggesting recognition of kin odor. It's also noted that belding's ground squirrels produce at least two scents arising from dorsal and oral secretions, giving two opportunities for kin recognition. Auditory distinctions have been noted among avian species. Long-tailed tits (\"Aegithalos caudatus\") are capable of discriminating kin and non-kin based on contact calls. Distinguishing calls are often learned from adults during the nestling period. Studies suggest that the bald-faced hornet, \"Dolichovespula maculata\", can recognize nest mates by their cuticular hydrocarbon profile, which produces a distinct smell.\n\nKin recognition in some species may also be mediated by immunogenetic similarity of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC). For a discussion of the interaction of these social and biological kin recognition factors see Lieberman, Tooby, and Cosmides (2007). Some have suggested that, as applied to humans, this nature-nurture interactionist perspective allows a synthesis between theories and evidence of social bonding and cooperation across the fields of evolutionary biology, psychology (attachment theory) and cultural anthropology (nurture kinship).\n\nKin recognition is an adaptive behavior observed in living beings to prevent inbreeding, and increase fitness of populations, individuals and genes. Kin recognition is the key to successful reciprocal altruism, a behavior that increases reproductive success of both organisms involved. Reciprocal altruism as a product of kin recognition has been observed and studied in many animals, and more recently, plants. Due to the nature of plant reproduction and growth, plants are more likely than animals to live in close proximity to family members, and therefore stand to gain more from the ability to differentiate kin from strangers (Waldman, 1988).\n\nIn recent years, botanists have been conducting studies to determine which plant species can recognize kin, and discover the responses of plants to neighboring kin. Murphy and Dudley (2009) shows that \"Impatiens pallida\" has the ability to recognize individuals closely related to them and those not related to them. The physiological response to this recognition is increasingly interesting. \"I. pallida\" responds to kin by increasing branchiness and stem elongation, to prevent shading relatives, and responds to strangers by increasing leaf to root allocation, as a form of competition.\n\nSimilarly, Bhatt et al. (2010) show that \"Cakile edentula\", the American sea rocket, has the ability to allocate more energy to root growth, and competition, in response to growing next to a stranger, and allocates less energy to root growth when planted next to a sibling. This reduces competition between siblings and increases fitness of relatives growing next to each other, while still allowing competition between non-relative plants.\n\nLittle is known about the mechanisms involved in kin recognition. They most likely vary between species as well as within species. A study by Bierdrzycki et al. (2010) shows that root secretions are necessary for \"Arabidopsis thaliana\" to recognize kin vs. strangers, but not necessary to recognize self vs. non-self roots. This study was performed using secretion inhibitors, which disabled the mechanism responsible for kin recognition in this species, and showed similar growth patterns to Bhatt et al., (2010) and Murphy and Dudley (2009) in control groups. The most interesting result of this study was that inhibiting root secretions did not reduce the ability of \"Arabidopsis\" to recognize their own roots, which implicates a separate mechanism for self/non-self recognition than that for kin/stranger recognition.\n\nWhile this mechanism in the roots responds to exudates and involves competition over resources like nitrogen and phosphorus, another mechanism has been recently proposed, which involves competition over light, in which kin recognition takes place in leaves. In their 2014 study, Crepy and Casal conducted multiple experiments on different accessions of \"A. thaliana\". These experiments showed that \"Arabidopsis\" accessions have distinct R:FR and blue light signatures, and that these signatures can be detected by photoreceptors, which allows the plant to recognize its neighbor as a relative or non-relative. Not much is known about the pathway that \"Arabidopsis\" uses to associate these light patterns with kin, however, researchers ascertained that photoreceptors phyB, cry 1, cry 2, phot1, and phot2 are involved in the process by performing a series of experiments with knock-out mutants. Researchers also concluded that the auxin-synthesis gene TAA1 is involved in the process, downstream of the photoreceptors, by performing a similar experiments using Sav3 knock-out mutants. This mechanism leads to altered leaf direction to prevent shading of related neighbors and to reduce competition for sunlight.\n\nWhen mice inbreed with close relatives in their natural habitat, there is a significant detrimental effect on progeny survival. Since inbreeding is detrimental, it tends to be avoided. In the house mouse, the major urinary protein (MUP) gene cluster provides a highly polymorphic scent signal of genetic identity that appears to underlie kin recognition and inbreeding avoidance. Thus there are fewer matings between mice sharing MUP haplotypes than would be expected if there were random mating. Another mechanism for avoiding inbreeding is evident when a female house mouse mates with multiple males. In such a case, there appears to be egg-driven sperm selection against sperm from related males.\n\nIn toads, male advertisement vocalizations may serve as cues by which females recognize their kin and thus avoid inbreeding.\n\nIn dioecious plants, the stigma may receive pollen from several different potential donors. As multiple pollen tubes from the different donors grow through the stigma to reach the ovary, the receiving maternal plant may carry out pollen selection favoring pollen from less related donor plants. Thus, kin recognition at the level of the pollen tube apparently leads to post-pollination selection to avoid inbreeding depression. Also, seeds may be aborted selectively depending on donor–recipient relatedness.\n\n", "id": "11801835", "title": "Kin recognition"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2747470", "text": "Biological thermodynamics\n\nBiological thermodynamics is the quantitative study of the energy transductions that occur in or between living organisms, structures, and cells and of the nature and function of the chemical processes underlying these transductions. Biological thermodynamics may address the question of whether the benefit associated with any particular phenotypic trait is worth the energy investment it requires.\n\nGerman-British medical doctor and biochemist Hans Krebs' 1957 book \"Energy Transformations in Living Matter\" (written with Hans Kornberg) was the first major publication on the thermodynamics of biochemical reactions. In addition, the appendix contained the first-ever published thermodynamic tables, written by Kenneth Burton, to contain equilibrium constants and Gibbs free energy of formations for chemical species, able to calculate biochemical reactions that had not yet occurred.\n\nNon-equilibrium thermodynamics has been applied for explaining how biological organisms can develop from disorder. Ilya Prigogine developed methods for the thermodynamic treatment of such systems. He called these systems dissipative systems, because they are formed and maintained by the dissipative processes that exchange energy between the system and its environment, and because they disappear if that exchange ceases. It may be said that they live in symbiosis with their environment. Energy transformations in biology are dependent primarily on photosynthesis. The total energy captured by photosynthesis in green plants from the solar radiation is about 2 x 10 joules of energy per year. Annual energy captured by photosynthesis in green plants is about 4% of the total sunlight energy that reaches Earth. The energy transformations in biological communities surrounding hydrothermal vents are exceptions; they oxidize sulfur, obtaining their energy via chemosynthesis rather than photosynthesis.\n\nThe field of biological thermodynamics is focused on principles of chemical thermodynamics in biology and biochemistry. Principles covered include the first law of thermodynamics, the second law of thermodynamics, Gibbs free energy, statistical thermodynamics, reaction kinetics, and on hypotheses of the origin of life. Presently, biological thermodynamics concerns itself with the study of internal biochemical dynamics as: ATP hydrolysis, protein stability, DNA binding, membrane diffusion, enzyme kinetics, and other such essential energy controlled pathways. In terms of thermodynamics, the amount of energy capable of doing work during a chemical reaction is measured quantitatively by the change in the Gibbs free energy. The physical biologist Alfred Lotka attempted to unify the change in the Gibbs free energy with evolutionary theory.\n\nThe sun is the primary source of energy for living organisms. Some living organisms like plants need sunlight directly while other organisms like humans can acquire energy from the sun indirectly. There is however evidence that some bacteria can thrive in harsh environments like Antarctica as evidence by the blue-green algae beneath thick layers of ice in the lakes. No matter what the type of living species, all living organisms must capture, transduce, store, and use energy to live.\n\nThe relationship between the energy of the incoming sunlight and its wavelength or frequency is given by\n\nwhere \"h\" is the Planck constant (6.63x10Js) and \"c\" is the speed of light (2.998x10 m/s). Plants trap this energy from the sunlight and undergo photosynthesis, effectively converting solar energy into chemical energy. To transfer the energy once again, animals will feed on plants and use the energy of digested plant materials to create biological macromolecules.\n\nThe First Law of Thermodynamics is a statement of the conservation of energy; though it can be changed from one form to another, energy can be neither created nor destroyed. From the first law, a principle called Hess's Law arises. Hess’s Law states that the heat absorbed or evolved in a given reaction must always be constant and independent of the manner in which the reaction takes place. Although some intermediate reactions may be endothermic and others may be exothermic, the total heat exchange is equal to the heat exchange had the process occurred directly. This principle is the basis for the calorimeter, a device used to determine the amount of heat in a chemical reaction. Since all incoming energy enters the body as food and is ultimately oxidized, the total heat production may be estimated by measuring the heat produced by the oxidation of food in a calorimeter. This heat is expressed in kilocalories, which are the common unit of food energy found on nutrition labels.\n\nThe Second Law of Thermodynamics is concerned primarily with whether or not a given process is possible. The Second Law states that no natural process can occur unless it is accompanied by an increase in the entropy of the universe. Stated differently, an isolated system will always tend to disorder. Living organisms are often mistakenly believed to defy the Second Law because they are able to increase their level of organization. To correct this misinterpretation, one must refer simply to the definition of systems and boundaries. A living organism is an open system, able to exchange both matter and energy with its environment. For example, a human being takes in food, breaks it down into its components, and then uses those to build up cells, tissues, ligaments, etc. This process increases order in the body, and thus decreases entropy. However, humans also 1) conduct heat to clothing and other objects they are in contact with, 2) generate convection due to differences in body temperature and the environment, 3) radiate heat into space, 4) consume energy-containing substances (i.e., food), and 5) eliminate waste (e.g., carbon dioxide, water, and other components of breath, urine, feces, sweat, etc.). When taking all these processes into account, the total entropy of the greater system (i.e., the human and her/his environment) increases. When the human ceases to live, none of these processes (1-5) take place, and any interruption in the processes (esp. 4 or 5) will quickly lead to morbidity and/or mortality.\n\nIn biological systems, in general energy and entropy change together. Therefore, it is necessary to be able to define a state function that accounts for these changes simultaneously. This state function is the Gibbs Free Energy, \"G\".\n\nwhere: \nThe change in Gibbs Free Energy can be used to determine whether a given chemical reaction can occur spontaneously. If ∆\"G\" is negative, the reaction can occur spontaneously. Likewise, if ∆\"G\" is positive, the reaction is nonspontaneous. Chemical reactions can be “coupled” together if they share intermediates. In this case, the overall Gibbs Free Energy change is simply the sum of the ∆\"G\" values for each reaction. Therefore, an unfavorable reaction (positive ∆\"G\") can be driven by a second, highly favorable reaction (negative ∆\"G\" where the magnitude of ∆\"G\" > magnitude of ∆\"G\"). For example, the reaction of glucose with fructose to form sucrose has a ∆\"G\" value of +5.5 kcal/mole. Therefore, this reaction will not occur spontaneously. The breakdown of ATP to form ADP and inorganic phosphate has a ∆\"G\" value of -7.3 kcal/mole. These two reactions can be coupled together, so that glucose binds with ATP to form glucose-1-phosphate and ADP. The glucose-1-phosphate is then able to bond with fructose yielding sucrose and inorganic phosphate. The ∆\"G\" value of the coupled reaction is -1.8 kcal/mole, indicating that the reaction will occur spontaneously. This principle of coupling reactions to alter the change in Gibbs Free Energy is the basic principle behind all enzymatic action in biological organisms.\n\n\n\n", "id": "2747470", "title": "Biological thermodynamics"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13478480", "text": "Biological exponential growth\n\nBiological exponential growth is the exponential growth of biological organisms. When the resources availability is unlimited in the habitat, the population of an organism living in the habitat grows in an exponential or geometric fashion. Population growth in which the number of individuals increase by a constant multiple in each generation. The potential for population growth can be demonstrated in the laboratory under conditions that provide abundant resources and space. For example, a few fruit flies in a large culture jar containing an abundant food source may reproduce rapidly. One female fruit fly may lay more than 50 eggs. Reproductive adults develop in about 14 days, with approximately equal numbers of male and female offspring. For each female that began the population, 50 flies are expected 2 weeks later. Each female in the second generation produces 50 more flies after 2 more weeks, and so on. In other words, the population is experiencing exponential growth. Slow exponential growth is when a population grows slowly yet exponential because the population has long live spans. While a rapid exponential growth refers to a population that grows ( and dies ) rapidly because the population has short life spans.\n\nResource availability is obviously essential for the unimpeded growth of a population. Ideally, when resources in the habitat are unlimited, each species has the ability to realise fully its innate potential to grow in number, as Charles Darwin observed while developing his theory of natural selection.\n\nIf, in a hypothetical population of size \"N\", the birth rates (per capita) are represented as \"b\" and death rates (per capita) as \"d\", then the increase or decrease in \"N\" during a time period \"t\" will be:\n\nformula_1\n\n(b-d) is called the 'intrinsic rate of natural increase' and is a very important parameter chosen for assessing the impacts of any biotic or abiotic factor on population growth.\n\nAny species growing exponentially under unlimited resource conditions can reach enormous population densities in a short time. Darwin showed how even a slow growing animal like the elephant could reach an enormous population if there were unlimited resources for its growth in its habitat.\n\nIf birth giving takes two parents we get Nurgaliev's law.\n\n", "id": "13478480", "title": "Biological exponential growth"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1556918", "text": "Phase response curve\n\nA phase response curve (PRC) illustrates the transient change in the cycle period of an oscillation induced by a perturbation as a function of the phase at which it is received. PRCs are used in various fields; examples of biological oscillations are the heartbeat, circadian rhythms, and the regular, repetitive firing observed in some neurons in the absence of noise.\n\nIn humans and animals, there is a regulatory system that governs the phase relationship of an organism's internal circadian clock to a regular periodicity in the external environment (usually governed by the solar day). In most organisms, a stable phase relationship is desired, though in some cases the desired phase will vary by season, especially among mammals with seasonal mating habits.\n\nIn circadian rhythm research, a PRC illustrates the relationship between a chronobiotic's time of administration (relative to the internal circadian clock) and the magnitude of the treatment's effect on circadian phase. Specifically, a PRC is a graph showing, by convention, time of the subject's endogenous day along the \"x\"-axis and the amount of the phase shift (in hours) along the \"y\"-axis. The curve has one peak and one nadir in each 24-hour cycle. Relative circadian time is plotted vs. phase shift magnitude. The treatment is usually narrowly specified as a set intensity and colour and duration of light exposure to the retina and skin, or a set dose and formulation of melatonin.\n\nThese curves are often consulted in the therapeutic setting. Normally, the body's various physiological rhythms will be synchronized within an individual organism (human or animal), usually with respect to a master biological clock. Of particular importance is the sleep–wake cycle. Various sleep disorders and externals stresses (such as jet lag) can interfere with this. People with non-24-hour sleep–wake disorder often experience an inability to maintain a consistent internal clock. Extreme chronotypes usually maintain a consistent clock, but find that their natural clock does not align with the expectations of their social environment. PRC curves provide a starting point for therapeutic intervention. The two common treatments used to shift the timing of sleep are light therapy, directed at the eyes, and administration of the hormone melatonin, usually taken orally. Either or both can be used daily. The phase adjustment is generally cumulative with consecutive daily administrations, and—at least partially—additive with concurrent administrations of distinct treatments. If the underlying disturbance is stable in nature, ongoing daily intervention is usually required. For jet lag, the intervention serves mainly to accelerate natural alignment, and ceases once desired alignment is achieved.\n\nNote that PRC curves from the experimental setting are usually aggregates of the test population, that there can be mild or significant variation within the test population, that individuals with sleep disorders often respond atypically, and that the formulation of the chronobiotic might be specific to the experimental setting and not generally available in clinical practice (e.g. for melatonin, one sustained-release formulation might differ in its release rate as compared to another); also, while the magnitude is dose-dependent, not all PRC graphs cover a range of doses. The discussions below are restricted to the PRCs for the light and melatonin in humans.\n\nStarting about two hours before an individual's regular bedtime, exposure of the eyes to light will delay the circadian phase, causing later wake-up time and later sleep onset. The delaying effect gets stronger as evening progresses; it is also dependent on the wavelength and illuminance (\"brightness\") of the light. The effect is small in dim indoor lighting.\n\nAbout five hours after usual bedtime, coinciding with the body temperature nadir (the lowest point of the core body temperature during sleep) the PRC peaks and the effect changes abruptly from phase delay to phase advance. Immediately after this peak, light exposure has its greatest phase-advancing effect, causing earlier wake-up and sleep onset. Again, illuminance greatly affects results; indoor light may be less than 500 lux while light therapy uses up to 10,000 lux. The effect diminishes until about two hours after spontaneous wake-up time, when it reaches approximately zero.\n\nDuring the period between two hours after usual wake-up time and two hours before usual bedtime, light exposure has little or no effect on circadian phase (slight effects generally cancelling each other out).\n\nAnother image of the PRC for light is here (Figure 1). Within that image, the explanatory text is \n\nLight therapy, typically with a light box producing 10,000 lux at a prescribed distance, can be used in the evening to delay or in the morning to advance a person's sleep timing. Because losing sleep to obtain bright light exposure is considered undesirable by most people, and because it is very difficult to estimate exactly when the greatest effect (the PRC peak) will occur in an individual, the treatment is usually applied daily just prior to bedtime (to achieve phase delay), or just after spontaneous awakening (to achieve phase advance).\n\nIn addition to its use in the adjustment of circadian rhythms, light therapy is used as treatment for several affective disorders including seasonal affective disorder (SAD).\n\nIn 2002 Brown University researchers led by David Berson announced the discovery of special cells in the human eye, ipRGCs (intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells), which many researchers now believe control the light entrainment effect of the phase response curve. In the human eye, the ipRGCs have the greatest response to light in the 460–480 nm (blue) range. In one experiment, 400 lux of blue light produced the same effects as 10,000 lux of white light. A theory of spectral opponency, in which the addition of other spectral colors renders blue light less effective for circadian phototransduction, was supported by research reported in 2005.\n\nThe phase response curve for melatonin is roughly twelve hours out of phase with the phase response curve for light. At spontaneous wake-up time, exogenous (externally administered) melatonin has a slight phase-delaying effect. The amount of phase-delay increases until about eight hours after wake-up time, when the effect swings abruptly from strong phase delay to strong phase advance. The phase-advance effect diminishes as the day goes on until it reaches zero about bedtime. From usual bedtime until wake-up time, exogenous melatonin has no effect on circadian phase.\n\nThe human body produces its own (endogenous) melatonin starting about two hours before bedtime, provided the lighting is dim. This is known as \"dim-light melatonin onset\", DLMO. This stimulates the phase-advance portion of the PRC and helps keep the body on a regular sleep-wake schedule. It also helps prepare the body for sleep.\n\nAdministration of melatonin at any time may have a mild hypnotic (sleep-inducing) effect. The expected effect on sleep phase timing, if any, is predicted by the PRC.\n\nIn a 2006 study Victoria L. Revell \"et al.\" showed that a combination of morning bright light and afternoon melatonin, both timed to phase advance according to the respective PRCs, produce a larger phase advance shift than bright light alone, for a total of up to 2 hours. All times are approximate and vary from one person to another. In particular, there is no convenient way to accurately determine the times of the peaks and zero-crossings of these curves in an individual. Administration of light or melatonin close to the time at which the effect is expected to change sense abruptly may, if the changeover time is not accurately known, produce an opposite effect to that desired.\n\nThe first published usage of the term \"phase response curve\" was in 1960 by Patricia DeCoursey. The \"daily\" activity rhythms of her flying squirrels, kept in constant darkness, responded to pulses of light exposure. The response varied according to the time of day—that is, the animals' subjective \"day\"—when light was administered. When DeCoursey plotted all her data relating the quantity and direction (advance or delay) of phase-shift on a single curve, she created the PRC. It has since been a standard tool in the study of biological rhythms.\n\nPhase response curve analysis can be used to understand the intrinsic properties and oscillatory behavior of regular-spiking neurons. The neuronal PRCs can be classified as being purely positive (PRC type I) or as having negative parts (PRC type II). Importantly, the PRC type exhibited by a neuron is indicative of its input–output function (excitability) as well as synchronization behavior: networks of PRC type II neurons can synchronize their activity via mutual excitatory connections, but those of PRC type I can not.\n\nExperimental estimation of PRC in living, regular-spiking neurons involves measuring the changes in inter-spike interval in response to a small perturbation, such as a transient pulse of current. Notably, the PRC of a neuron is not fixed but may change when firing frequency or neuromodulatory state of the neuron is changed.\n\n\n", "id": "1556918", "title": "Phase response curve"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18101603", "text": "High throughput biology\n\nHigh throughput cell biology is the use of automation equipment with classical cell biology techniques to address biological questions that are otherwise unattainable using conventional methods. It may incorporate techniques from optics, chemistry, biology or image analysis to permit rapid, highly parallel research into how cells function, interact with each other and how pathogens exploit them in disease.\n\nHigh-throughput biology serves as one facet of what has also been called \"omics research\" - the interface between large scale biology (genome, proteome, transcriptome), technology and researchers. High throughput cell biology has a definite focus on the cell, and methods accessing the cell such as imaging, gene expression microarrays, or genome wide screening. The basic idea is to take methods normally performed on their own and do a very large number of them without impacting their quality.\n\nHigh throughput research can be defined as the automation of experiments such that large scale repetition becomes feasible. This is important because many of the questions faced by life science researchers now involve large numbers. For example, the Human Genome contains at least 21,000 genes, all of which can potentially contribute to cell function, or disease. To be able to capture an idea of how these genes interact with one another, which genes are involved in and where they are, methods that encompass from the cell to the genome are of interest.\n\nClassical High throughput screening robotics are now being tied closer to cell biology, principally using technologies such as High-content screening. High throughput cell biology dictates methods that can take routine cell biology from low scale research to the speed and scale necessary to investigate complex systems, achieve high sample size, or efficiently screen through a collection.\n\nIt has a greater emphasis on function rather than discovery, and will have its most significant impact in exploring biology as we progress toward models of the cell as a system rather than isolated pathways.\n\nHigh-content screening technology is mainly based on automated digital microscopy and flow cytometry, in combination with IT-systems for the analysis and storage of the data.\n\"High-content\" or visual biology technology has two purposes, first to acquire spatially or temporally resolved information on an event and second to automatically quantify it. Spatially resolved instruments are typically automated microscopes, and temporal resolution still requires some form of fluorescence measurement in most cases.This means that a lot of HCS instruments are (fluorescence) microscopes that are connected to some form of image analysis package. These take care of all the steps in taking fluorescent images of cells and provide rapid, automated and unbiased assessment of experiments.\n\nThe technology can be defined as being at the same development point as the first automated DNA sequencers in the early 1990s. Automated DNA sequencing was a disruptive technology when it became practical and -even if early devices had shortcomings- it enabled genome scale sequencing projects and created the field of bioinformatics. The impact of a similarly disruptive and powerful technology on molecular cell biology and translational research is hard to predict but what is clear is that it will cause a profound change in the way cell biologists research and medicines are discovered.\n\n\n", "id": "18101603", "title": "High throughput biology"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21167788", "text": "Comparator system\n\nA comparator system, or simply comparator, in the fields of biophysics, biology, and neurology is a particular organisation of neurons. Comparators, as their name suggests, compare several inputs of internal or external information, and are important to the field of neural learning. In biological systems, comparators help an organism adapt to changes in its surroundings.\n", "id": "21167788", "title": "Comparator system"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23826998", "text": "Compensatory growth (organ)\n\nCompensatory growth is a type of regenerative growth that can take place in a number of human organs after the organs are either damaged, removed, or cease to function. Additionally, increased functional demand can also stimulate this growth in tissues and organs. The growth can be a result of increased cell size (compensatory hypertrophy) or an increase in cell division (compensatory hyperplasia) or both. For instance, if one kidney is surgically removed, the cells of other kidney divide at an increased rate. Eventually, the remaining kidney can grow until its mass approaches the combined mass of two kidneys. Along with the kidneys, compensatory growth has also been characterized in a number of other tissues and organs including:\n\nA large number of growth factors and hormones are involved with compensatory growth, but the exact mechanism is not fully understood and probably varies between different organs. Nevertheless, angiogenic growth factors which control the growth of blood vessels are particularly important because blood flow significantly determines the maximum growth of an organ.\n\nCompensatory growth may also refer to the accelerated growth following a period of slowed growth, particularly as a result of nutrient deprivation.\n\n", "id": "23826998", "title": "Compensatory growth (organ)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10086055", "text": "Test (biology)\n\nIn biology, a test is the hard shell of some spherical marine animals, notably sea urchins and microorganisms such as testate foraminiferans, radiolarians, and testate amoebae.\n\nThe anatomical term \"test\" derives from the Latin \"testa\" (which means a rounded bowl, amphora or bottle). It is distinct from the term \"test\" as in \"examination\", which derives from \"testis\", related to the idea of testimony.\n\nThe test is a skeletal structure, made of hard material such as calcium carbonate, silica, chitin or composite materials. As such, it allows the protection of the internal organs and the attachment of soft flesh.\n\nThe test of sea urchins is made of calcium carbonate, strengthened by a framework of calcite monocrystals, in a characteristic \"stereomic\" structure. These two ingredients provide sea urchins with a great solidity and a moderate weight, as well as the capacity to regenerate the mesh from the cuticle. According to a 2012 study, the skeletal structures of sea urchins consist in \"92% of bricks of calcite monocrystals (conferring solidity and hardness) and 8 % of a \"mortar\" of amorphous lime (allowing flexibility and lightness). This lime is constituted itself of 99.9% of calcium carbonate, with 0.1% structural proteins, which make sea urchins animals with an extremely mineralized skeleton (which also explains their excellent conservation as fossils).\n\nThe test of foraminiferan initially consists of gradually mineralized organic matter, but also sometimes exogenous agglomerated particles (in particular for species living in the sediment or in great depth). It can be of many types, like agglutinated (exogenous agglomerate), microgranular (with calcite grains), porcelain-like (smooth calcite) or hyalin (lens). Foraminiferans develops by building new rooms in their test. These are arranged according to a geometry particular to each species: they can be rectilinear, curved, rolled up or cyclic, and every time uniserial or multiserial. These organizational types can also be mixed, or even more complex. Miliolids have a particular arrangement. The surface of the test can be smooth or textured.\n\nIn ascidians the sheath is sometimes called test as well, and is composed largely of a particular type of cellulose historically termed \"tunicine\". From 1845 (when this was discovered by Schmidt) until 1958 (when cellulose fibres were found in mammalian connective tissue), ascidians were believed to be the only animals that synthesised cellulose.\n\nOn a strictly scientific point of view, the term \"test\" should be restricted to the hard shell protecting sea urchins and foraminiferans. For sessile echinoderms (like crinoids, but also many fossile groups such as cistoids or blastoids), the correct word is \"theca\". For diatomea, the term in use is \"frustule\", and for radiolarians it should be \"capsule\". The more common word \"shell\" is used for mollusks, arthropods and turtles (even if the latter ones belong to the order \"Testudines\").\n\n", "id": "10086055", "title": "Test (biology)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24809644", "text": "Suture materials comparison chart\n\nNumerous different surgical suture materials exist. The following table compares some of the most common absorbable sutures.\n\n3.Types of sutures and suture materials\n", "id": "24809644", "title": "Suture materials comparison chart"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20445291", "text": "Potassium spatial buffering\n\nPotassium spatial buffering is a mechanism for the regulation of extracellular potassium concentration by astrocytes. Other mechanisms for astrocytic potassium clearance are carrier-operated or channel-operated potassium chloride uptake.\nThe repolarization of neurons tends to raise potassium concentration in the extracellular fluid. If a significant rise occurs, it will interfere with neuronal signaling by depolarizing neurons. Astrocytes have large numbers of potassium ion channels facilitating removal of potassium ions from the extracellular fluid. They are taken up at one region of the astrocyte and then distributed throughout the cytoplasm of the cell, and further to its neighbors via gap junctions. This keeps extracellular potassium at levels that prevent interference with normal propagation of an action potential.\n\nGlial cells, once believed to have a passive role in CNS, are active regulators of numerous functions in the brain, including clearance of the neurotransmitter from the synapses, guidance during neuronal migration, control of neuronal synaptic transmission, and maintaining ideal ionic environment for active communications between neurons in central nervous system.\n\nNeurons are surrounded by extracellular fluid rich in sodium ions and poor in potassium ions. The concentrations of these ions are reversed inside the cells. Due to the difference in concentration, there is a chemical gradient across the cell membrane, which leads to sodium influx and potassium efflux. When the action potential takes place, a considerable change in extracellular potassium concentration occurs due to the limited volume of the CNS extracellular space. The change in potassium concentration in the extracellular space impacts a variety of neuronal processes, such as maintenance of membrane potential, activation and inactivation of voltage gated channels, synaptic transmission, and electrogenic transport of neurotransmitter. Change of extracellular potassium concentration of from 3mM can affect neural activity. Therefore, there are diverse cellular mechanisms for tight control of potassium ions, the most widely accepted mechanisms being K+ spatial buffering mechanism. Orkand and his colleagues who first theorized spatial buffering stated “if a Glial cell becomes depolarized by K+ that has accumulated in the clefts, the resulting current carries K+ inward in the high [K+] region and out again, through electrically coupled Glial cells in low [K+] regions” \nIn the model presented by Orkand and his colleagues, glial cells intake and traverse potassium ions from region of high concentrations to region of low concentration maintaining potassium concentration to be low in extracellular space. Glial cells are well suited for transportation of potassium ions since it has unusually high permeability to potassium ions and traverse long distance by its elongated shape or by being coupled to one another.\n\nPotassium buffering can be broadly categorized into two categories: Potassium uptake and Potassium spatial buffering. For potassium uptake, excess potassium ions are temporarily taken into glial cells through transporters, or potassium channels. In order to preserve electroneutrality, potassium influxes into glial cells are accompanied by influx of chlorine or efflux of sodium. It is expected that when potassium accumulates within glial cells, water influx and swelling occurs. For potassium spatial buffering, functionally coupled glial cells with high potassium permeability transfer potassium ions from regions of elevated potassium concentration to regions of lower potassium concentration. The potassium current is driven by the difference in glial syncytium membrane potential and local potassium equilibrium potential. When one region of potassium concentration increases, there is a net driving force causing potassium to flow into the glial cells. The entry of potassium causes a local depolarization that propagates electrotonically through the glial cell network which causes net driving force of potassium out of the glial cells. This process causes dispersion of local potassium with little net gain of potassium ions within the glial cells, which in turn prevents swelling. Glial cell depolarization caused by neuronal activity releases potassium onto blood stream, which was once widely hypothesized to be cause of vessel relaxation, was found to have little affect on neurovascular coupling. Despite the efficiency of potassium spatial buffering mechanisms, in certain regions of CNS, potassium buffering seems more dependent on active uptake mechanisms rather than spatial buffering. Therefore, the exact role of glial potassium spatial buffering in the various regions of our brain still remains uncertain.\n\nThe high permeability of glial cell membranes to potassium ions is a result of expression of high densities of potassium-selective channels with high open-probability at resting membrane potentials. Kir channels, potassium inward-rectifying channels, allow passage of potassium ions inward much more readily than outward. They also display a variable conductance that positively correlates with extracellular potassium concentration: the higher the potassium concentration outside the cell, the higher the conductance. \n\nKir channels are categorized into seven major subfamilies, Kir1 to Kir7, with a variety of gating mechanisms. Kir3 and Kir6 are primarily activated by intracellular G-proteins. Because they have a relatively low open-probability compared to the other families, they have little impact on potassium buffering. Kir1 and Kir7 are mainly expressed in epithelial cells, such as those in kidney, choroid plexus, or retinal pigment epithelium, and have no impact on spatial buffering. Kir2, however, are expressed in brain neurons and glial cells. Kir4 and Kir5 are, along with Kir2, located in Muller glia and play important roles in potassium siphoning. There are some discrepancies among studies on expression of these channels in the stated locations.\n\nThe panglial syncytium is a large network of interconnected glial cells, which are extensively linked by gap junctions. The panglial syncytium spreads through central nervous system where it provides metabolic and osmotic support, as well as ionic regulation of myelinated axons in white matter tracts. The three types of macroglial cells within network of panglial syncytium are astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, and ependymocytes. Originally it was believed that there was homologous gap junction between oligodendrocytes. It was later found through untrastructural analysis that gap junctions do not directly link adjacent oligodendrocytes, rather it gap junctions with adjacent astrocytes, providing secondary pathway to nearby oligodendrocytes. With direct gap junction between myelin sheaths to surrounding astrocytes, excess potassium and osmotic water directly enters astrocyte syncytium, where it downstream to astrocyte endfeet at capillaries and the glia limitans. \n\nPotassium spatial buffering that occurs in the retina is called potassium siphoning, where the Muller cell is the principal glial cell type. Muller cells have important role in retinal physiology. It maintains retinal cell metabolism and are critical in maintaining potassium homeostasis in extracellular space during neuronal activity. Like cells responsible for spatial buffering, Muller cells are distinctively permeable to potassium ions through Kir channels. Like other glial cells, the high selectivity of Muller cell membranes to potassium ions is due to the high density of Kir channels. Potassium conductance is unevenly distributed in Muller cells. By focally increasing potassium ions along amphibian Muller cells and recording the resulting depolarization, the observed potassium conductance was concentrated in the endfoot process of 94% of the total potassium conductance localized to the small subcellular domain. The observation lead to hypothesis that excess potassium in extracellular space is “siphoned” by the Muller cells to the vitreous humor. Potassium siphoning is a specialized form of spatial buffering mechanisms where large reservoir of potassium ions is emptied into vitreous humor. Similar distribution pattern of Kir channels could be found in amphibians.\n\nExistence of potassium siphoning was first reported in 1966 study by Orkand et al. In the study, optic nerve of Necturus was dissected to document the long-distance movement of potassium after the nerve stimulation. Following the low frequency stimulation of .5 Hz at the retinal end of the dissected optic nerve, depolarization 1-2mV was measured at astrocytes at the opposite end of the nerve bundle, which was up to several millimeters from the electrode. With higher frequency stimulation, higher plateau of depolarization was observed. Therefore, they hypothesized that the potassium released to extracellular compartment during axonal activity entered and depolarized nearby astrocytes, where it was transported away by unfamiliar mechanism, which caused depolarization on astrocytes distant from site of stimulation. The proposed model was actually inappropriate since at the time neither gap junctions nor syncytium among glial cells were known, and optic nerve of Necturus are unmyelinated, which means that potassium efflux occurred directly into the periaxonal extracellular space, where potassium ions in extracellular space would be directly absorbed into the abundant astrocytes around axons.\n\nIn patients with Tuberous Sclerosis Complex (TSC), abnormalities occur in astrocyte, which leads to pathogenesis of neurological dysfunction in this disease. TSC is a multisystem genetic disease with mutation in either TSC1 or TSC2 gene. It results in disabling neurological symptoms such as mental retardation, autism, and seizures. Glial cells have important physiological roles of regulating neuronal excitability and preventing epilepsy. Astrocytes maintain homeostasis of excitatory substances, such as extracellular potassium, by immediate uptake through specific potassium channels and sodium potassium pumps. It is also regulated by potassium spatial buffering via astrocyte networks where astrocytes are coupled through gap junctions. Mutations in TSC1 or TSC2 gene often results in decreased expression of the astrocytic connexin protein, Cx43. With impairment in gap junction coupling between astrocytes, myriad of abnormalities in potassium buffering occurs which results in increased extracellular potassium concentration and may predispose to neuronal hyperexcitability and seizures. According to a study done on animal model, connexin43-deficient mice showed decreased threshold for the generation of epileptiform events. The study also demonstrated role of gap junction in accelerating potassium clearance, limiting potassium accumulation during neuronal firing, and relocating potassium concentrations.\n\nDemyelinating Diseases of the central nervous system, such as Neuromyelitis Optica, often leads to molecular components of the panglial syncytium being compromised, which leads to blocking of potassium spatial buffering. Without mechanism of potassium buffering, potassium induced osmotic swelling of myelin occurs where myelins are destroyed and axonal salutatory conduction ceases.\n", "id": "20445291", "title": "Potassium spatial buffering"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8355163", "text": "Radioactivity in the life sciences\n\nRadioactivity is generally used in life sciences for highly sensitive and direct measurements of biological phenomena, and for visualizing the location of biomolecules radiolabelled with a radioisotope.\n\nAll atoms exist as stable or unstable isotopes and the latter decay at a given half-life ranging from attoseconds to billions of years; radioisotopes useful to biological and experimental systems have half-lives ranging from minutes to months. In the case of the hydrogen isotope tritium (half-life = 12.3 years) and carbon-14 (half-life = 5,730 years), these isotopes derive their importance from all organic life containing hydrogen and carbon and therefore can be used to study countless living processes, reactions, and phenomena. Most short lived isotopes are produced in cyclotrons, linear particle accelerators, or nuclear reactors and their relatively short half-lives give them high maximum theoretical specific activities which is useful for detection in biological systems.\nRadiolabeling is a technique used to track the passage of a molecule that incorporates a radioisotope through a reaction, metabolic pathway, cell, tissue, organism, or biological system. The reactant is 'labeled' by replacing specific atoms by their isotope. Replacing an atom with its own radioisotope is an intrinsic label that does not alter the structure of the molecule. Alternatively, molecules can be radiolabeled by chemical reactions that introduce an atom, moiety, or functional group that contains a radionuclide. For example, radio-iodination of peptides and proteins with biologically useful iodine isotopes is easily done by an oxidation reaction that replaces the hydroxyl group with iodine on tyrosine and histadine residues. Another example is to use chelators such DOTA that can be chemically coupled to a protein; the chelator in turn traps radiometals thus radiolabeling the protein. This has been used for introducing Yttrium-90 onto a monoclonal antibody for therapeutic purposes and for introducing Gallium-68 onto the peptide Octreotide for diagnostic imaging by PET imaging. (See DOTA uses.)\n\nRadiolabeling is not necessary for some applications. For some purposes, soluble ionic salts can be used directly without further modification (e.g., gallium-67, gallium-68, and radioiodine isotopes). These uses rely on the chemical and biological properties of the radioisotope itself, to localize it within the organism or biological system.\n\nMolecular imaging is the biomedical field that employs radiotracers to visualize and quantify biological processes using positron emission tomography (PET) and single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) imaging. Again, a key feature of using radioactivity in life science applications is that it is a quantitative technique, so PET/SPECT not only reveals where a radiolableled molecule is but how much is there.\n\nRadiobiology (also known as radiation biology) is a field of clinical and basic medical sciences that involves the study of the action of radioactivity on biological systems. The controlled action of deleterious radioactivity on living systems is the basis of radiation therapy.\n\nTritium (Hydrogen-3) is a very low beta energy emitter that can be used to label proteins, nucleic acids, drugs and almost any organic biomolecule. The maximum theoretical specific activity of tritium is 28.8 Ci/mmol (1.066 PBq/mol). However, there is often more than one tritium atom per molecule: for example, tritiated UTP is sold by most suppliers with carbons 5 and 6 each bonded to a tritium atom.\n\nFor tritium detection, liquid scintillation counters have been classically employed, in which the energy of a tritium decay is transferred to a scintillant molecule in solution which in turn gives off photons whose intensity and spectrum can be measured by a photomultiplier array. The efficiency of this process is 4–50%, depending on the scintillation cocktail used. \n\nCarbon-14 has a long half-life of 5,730±40 years. Its maximum specific activity is 0.0624 Ci/mmol (2.31 TBq/mol). It is used in applications such as radiometric dating or drug tests. C-14 labeling is common in drug development to do ADME (absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion) studies in animal models and in human toxicology and clinical trials. Since tritium exchange may occur in some radiolabeled compounds, this does not happen with C-14 and may thus be preferred.\n\nSodium-22 and chlorine-36 are commonly used to study ion transporters. However, sodium-22 is hard to screen off and chlorine-36, with a half-life of 300,000 years, has low activity.\n\nSulfur-35 is used to label proteins and nucleic acids. Cysteine is an amino acid containing a thiol group which can be labeled by S-35. For nucleotides that do not contain a sulfur group, the oxygen on one of the phosphate groups can be substituted with a sulfur. This thiophosphate acts the same as a normal phosphate group, although there is a slight bias against it by most polymerases. The maximum theoretical specific activity is 1,494 Ci/mmol (55.28 PBq/mol).\n\nPhosphorus-33 is used to label nucleotides. It is less energetic than P-32 and does not require protection with plexi glass. A disadvantage is its higher cost compared to P-32, as most of the bombarded P-31 will have acquired only one neutron, while only some will have acquired two or more. Its maximum specific activity is 5,118 Ci/mmol (189.4 PBq/mol).\n\nPhosphorus-32 is widely used for labeling nucleic acids and phosphoproteins. It has the highest emission energy (1.7 MeV) of all common research radioisotopes. This is a major advantage in experiments for which sensitivity is a primary consideration, such as titrations of very strong interactions (i.e., very low dissociation constant), footprinting experiments, and detection of low-abundance phosphorylated species. 32P is also relatively inexpensive. Because of its high energy, however, its safe use requires a number of engineering controls (e.g., acrylic glass) and administrative controls. The half-life of 32P is 14.2 days, and its maximum specific activity is 9131 Ci/mmol.\n\nIodine-125 is commonly used for labeling proteins, usually at tyrosine residues. Unbound iodine is volatile and must be handled in a fume hood. Its maximum specific activity is 2,176 Ci/mmol (80.51 PBq/mol).\n\nA good example of the difference in energy of the various radionuclei is the detection window ranges used to detect them, which are generally proportional to the energy of the emission, but vary from machine to machine: in a Perkin elmer TriLux Beta scintillation counter , the H-3 energy range window is between channel 5–360; C-14, S-35 and P-33 are in the window of 361–660; and P-32 is in the window of 661–1024.\n\nIn liquid scintillation counting, a small aliquot, filter or swab is added to scintillation fluid and the plate or vial is placed in a scintillation counter to measure the radioactive emissions. Manufacturers have incorporated solid scintillants into multi-well plates to eliminate the need for scintillation fluid and make this into a high-throughput technique.\n\nA gamma counter is similar in format to scintillation counting but it detects gamma emissions directly and does not require a scintillant.\n\nA Geiger counter is a quick and rough approximation of activity. Lower energy emitters such as tritium can not be detected.\n\nAutoradiography: A tissue section affixed to a microscope slide or a membrane such as a Northern blot or a hybridized slot blot can be placed against x-ray film or phosphor screens to acquire a photographic or digital image. The density of exposure, if calibrated, can supply exacting quantitative information.\n\nPhosphor storage screen: The slide or membrane is placed against a phosphor screen which is then scanned in a phosphorimager. This is many times faster than film/emulsion techniques and outputs data in a digital form, thus it has largely replaced film/emulsion techniques.\n\nElectron microscopy: The sample is not exposed to a beam of electrons but detectors picks up the expelled electrons from the radionuclei.\n\nMicro-autoradiography: A tissue section, typically cryosectioned, is placed against a phosphor screen as above.\n\nQuantitative Whole Body Autoradiography (QWBA): Larger than micro-autoradiography, whole animals, typically rodents, can be analyzed for biodistribution studies.\n\nSchild regression is a radioligand binding assay. It is used for DNA labelling (5' and 3'), leaving the nucleic acids intact.\n\nA vial of radiolabel has a \"total activity\". Taking as an example γ32P ATP, from the catalogues of the two major suppliers, Perkin Elmer NEG502H500UC or GE AA0068-500UCI, in this case, the total activity is 500 μCi (other typical numbers are 250 μCi or 1 mCi). This is contained in a certain volume, depending on the radioactive concentration, such as 5 to 10 mCi/mL (185 to 370 TBq/m); typical volumes include 50 or 25 μL.\n\nNot all molecules in the solution have a P-32 on the last (i.e., gamma) phosphate: the \"specific activity\" gives the radioactivity concentration and depends on the radionuclei's half-life. If every molecule were labelled, the maximum theoretical specific activity is obtained that for P-32 is 9131 Ci/mmol. Due to pre-calibration and efficiency issues this number is never seen on a label; the values often found are 800, 3000 and 6000 Ci/mmol. With this number it is possible to calculate the total chemical concentration and the hot-to-cold ratio.\n\n\"Calibration date\" is the date in which the vial’s activity is the same as on the label. \"Pre-calibration\" is when the activity is calibrated in a future date to compensate for the decay occurred during shipping.\n\nPrior to the widespread use of fluorescence in the past three decades radioactivity was the most common label.\n\nThe primary advantage of fluorescence over radiotracers is that it does not require radiological controls and their associated expenses and safety measures. The decay of radioisotpes may limit the shelf life of a reagent, requiring its replacement and thus increasing expenses. Several fluorescent molecules can be used simultaneously (given that they do not overlap, cf. FRET), whereas with radioactivity two isotopes can be used (tritium and a low energy isotope, e.g. P due to different intensities) but require special equipment (a tritium screen and a regular phosphor-imaging screen, a specific dual channel detector, e.g. ).\n\nFluorescence is not necessary easier or more convenient to use because fluorescence requires specialized equipment of its own and because quenching makes absolute and/or reproducible quantification difficult.\n\nThe primary disadvantage of fluorescence versus radiotracers is a significant biological problem: chemically tagging a molecule with a fluorescent dye radically changes the structure of the molecule, which in turn can radically change the way that molecule interacts with other molecules. In contrast, intrinsic radiolabeling of a molecule can be done without altering its structure in any way. For example, substituting a H-3 for a hydrogen atom or C-14 for a carbon atom does not change the conformation, structure, or any other property of the molecule, it's just switching forms of the same atom. Thus an intrinscially radiolabeled molecule is identical to its unlabeled counterpart.\n\nMeasurement of biological phenomona by radiotracers is always direct. In contrast, many life science fluorescence applications are indirect, consisting of a fluorescent dye increasing, decreasing, or shifting in wavelength emission upon binding to the molecule of interest.\n\nIf good health physics controls are maintained in a laboratory where radionuclides are used, it is unlikely that the overall radiation dose received by workers will be of much significance. Nevertheless, the effects of low doses are mostly unknown so many regulations exist to avoid unnecessary risks, such as skin or internal exposure. Due to the low penetration power and many variables involved it is hard to convert a radioactive concentration to a dose.\n1 μCi of P-32 on a square centimetre of skin (through a dead layer of a thickness of 70 μm) gives 7961 rads (79.61 grays) per hour . Similarly a mammogram gives an exposure of 300 mrem (3 mSv) on a larger volume (in the US, the average annual dose is 620 mrem or 6.2 mSv ).\n\n", "id": "8355163", "title": "Radioactivity in the life sciences"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29880293", "text": "Gender typing\n\nGender typing is the process by which a child becomes aware of their gender and thus behaves accordingly by adopting values and attributes of members of the sex that they identify as their own. This process is extremely important for a child’s social and personality development because it largely impacts the child’s understanding of expected social behaviour and influences social judgments.\n\nGiven the definition, once the child is aware of their gender they will start to behave in gender roles that their same-sex models would normally adopt. Therefore, these individual responses become internalized and function according to the appropriate gender-role standards. The responses that individuals receive from their social group will mold their identity – becoming more feminine or masculine – and thus affect the way they view the world. Other facets of the process can also result in atypical development. Albeit, whether a child develops shared traits, cross-gender identities, or androgyny, their decision begins with the identification of a gender and the models he or she chooses to emulate. The behaviors they adopt will ultimately shape their knowledge and identity for who they are and how they should behave.\n\nSigmund Freud believed that as a child progresses through each of the different stages in psychosexual development, during the third year of the child’s life, genitals are thought to become active. As children develop a greater understanding of their own sex they also develop either a castration complex (in boys) or penis envy (in girls). For boys, during the “phallic” stage, they are at the height of childhood sexuality. During this the Oedipus complex occurs, where the boy feels erotic love for his mother (Electra complex in girls where love is directed towards the father). As time progresses and the boy matures, he is slowly able to let go of the rival feelings he has towards his father and free himself from his love for his parents. At this time, the boy learns to emulate masculine attributes from his father and subsequently to identify with him.\nThe girl’s development, Freud argued, is more complicated. Generally, as with males, the first object of interest is also the mother figure and for the first four years and beyond a girl remains attached to her mother. However, when the female child learns about “castration” it sparks disappointment and she blames her mother for her lack of a penis. Because of this, the girl gives up masturbation and in turn shifts focus from her mother to her father. By abandoning masturbation the girl can no longer be active, thus displaying a passive nature. The father then assists her by smoothly transitioning her towards a more feminine path. Furthermore, the girl’s affection towards her father will also influence her to emulate her mother’s feminine qualities and eventually adopt more gender-typed behaviours.\n\nThe cognitive-developmental theory is also closely linked to Jean Piaget’s analysis for the age-related cognitive changes a child goes through. Lawrence Kohlberg suggested that cognition comes before action and behavior (“I am a boy so I do boy-like things”). This emphasizes the importance of a child’s understanding about gender roles and their permanent placement in it. After a child can fully grasp this concept, gender-specific information will become more relevant. This idea of gender consistency, similar to Piaget’s concrete-operational stage, is represented by three stages:\n\nWhen the child is able to fully grasp gender stable understanding about themselves, usually between the ages of five and seven, the motivation to master their orientation and to socialize themselves allows them to seek out same-sexed models to learn more about gender-stereotypic behaviors.\n\nA schema is a cognitively organized network of associations that is readily available to help guide an individual’s perception. Gender schema acts as a guide or standard for consistent behavior in a given scenario. Labels such as “girls are weak and boys are strong,” classifies what stereotypically acceptable actions for the gender groups are. Therefore, the theory proposes the idea that once the child has developed basic knowledge on gender behaviors they will begin to construct gender schemas. This is acquired first through the basic understanding of gender-specific roles. In order words, the child learns the contents of the society, things that are related to their own and the opposite sex, and incorporates it into their gender schemas. The child then learns to apply the appropriate attributes respectively to the right gender by selectively using this knowledge to conceptualize their own actions. Hence, categorizing how they should perform in various situations by molding their capabilities to match the schematic labels.\n\nSocial learning theorists, like Albert Bandura, suggest that adults not only provide models for children to imitate, but that they also are actively involved in influencing a child’s gender-role identification. The Social learning theory proposes that gender-identities and gender-role preferences are acquired through two concepts.\n\n\n\nThere are many opportunities for a child to learn and develop their own understanding of what “gender” is. Thus as children progresses from childhood into adolescence they will already have been exposed to many factors that will influence their ideas and attitudes for normative social behaviors regarding gender roles. Social models, such as parents, siblings, and the media become extremely important during different stages of the child’s development.\n\nParents:\nParents play a vital part in a child’s early life, for they are the first group of people that a child meets and learns from. The information that surrounds a child at home becomes reinforcements for desired behaviors of a male or female. Studies have shown that as immediate as 24 hours after a child is born most parents have already engaged in gender stereotypic expectations of sons or daughters. Through examples such as painting a room pink or blue, encouragement to participate in shared sex-typed activities, offering gender differentiated toys, or treating the opposite sex child differently, these parent-child interactions have long lasting influence on how a child connects to certain gender-specific behaviors.\nFurthermore, various evidence suggest that certain household differences affecting how a child is raised can influence how similar (or different) a child is to the opposite sex, therefore how “feminine” or “masculine” the child can potentially become. For instance, as certain research demonstrates, in the absence of a father figure boys are generally more “feminine” than those living with a father. This demonstrates the significance of father-son modeling. The same research reveals that boyhood femininity is more strongly correlated with parental reinforcement such as a father or mother’s desire for a girl and/or their approval for feminine behaviours.\n\nSiblings:\nApart from parents, children also seek reinforcement from their older siblings. Therefore, inconsistencies for gender behaviors can also be as a result of children emulating their siblings of opposite sex.\nSibling’s influence is often most effective when the sibling is of an age that is more advanced than the child himself, therefore increasing the motivation for the child to model after their brother or sister. The impact of older siblings are power predictors for the younger sibling’s gender role attitudes, sex-typed personality qualities, and masculine leisure activities. Findings suggest that girls develop less traditional attitudes than boys, thus, relative to stereotypically traditional development, older male siblings are more conscientious towards masculine activities, which are evidently modeled after by younger siblings more than feminine activities. Moreover, older brothers tend to have stronger influence over a younger sibling’s sexual development. There is evidence that the relationship between older brother and younger sister can, in fact, influence the sister to become more feminine, abiding to more stereotypical gender-typed development than girls with older sisters. Interestingly, biological studies show that dizygotic twins with the opposite- sex co-twin gender show more sex-typed behaviors than same-sex twins.\nConversely, this can also develop in an opposite direction in which children may try to diverge themselves from their siblings as much as possible, making their differences more salient; however, this may be more evident in first-borns possibly due to the birth order.\n\nPeers:\nAt a young age, children can already utilize their knowledge of different social categories to form stereotypes about what they understand about men and women. Interaction with peer groups will often shape people’s behavior to fit normative expectations. Children often group together with other children of the same-gender. Belonging in a group that shares the same gender identity will often endorse more gender appropriate traits. An example of this is the fact that girls have more expressive traits than boys. Research also show that children often engage in play with same-sex peers, and exclude others who are different from the norm. For example, children who want to join a group will only be allowed to engage in play if they are a same-gender peer who has had prior experience with the activity, or an opposite-gender peer who has not had prior experience. The desire to engage in play can influence a child to behave like to their peers. In later life, as children starts to move away from their parents, the role of friendship becomes much more influential.\n\nMedia:\nChildren learn about different gender categories by observing various forms of media. They often look for gender roles, with whom they can relate to, from books and television. Conversely, these sources of media will also stereotypically shape a child’s understanding for gender acceptable behaviors. Studies examining the effects of gender stereotyping in children’s literature describe that, most often than not, gender views are affiliated with stereotypes which are both culturally and individually constructed. In children’s literature, male characters appear to be more central as well as less emotional and stronger. Female characters on the other hand worked out their feelings through expression, they are more dependent and usually adopt the roles of more domesticated characters.\nMoreover, these characteristics are also seen in television programing. For example, in most prime-time television shows women receive twice as many comments about her appearance than men. Similarly, a study investigating the cartoon “Pokémon” and gender role expresses the differences in “good” and “bad” characters. Jesse and James (villains of the story) are portrayed to have adopted counter-stereotypical portrayal. While Jesse is seen as more aggressive and James as more feminine, it subtly teaches children that nontraditional or nonstereotypical gender role behaviors are bad. Furthermore, children in the story have difficultly recalling a male Pokémon revealing that there is an imbalance in which prominence is given to male characters.\nThese depictions of male and female character roles can potentially become unconsciously influential in the way a child constructs gender views.\n\nIt is expected for children to develop gender-typed behavioural cues given that children often use gender-related information to make judgments. Society often rewards shared traditional behaviours, especially for men, and thus having progressed to a cross-gender development can lead to unwanted criticisms and punishment. Therefore, when children undergo atypical gender development, due to both genetic and environmental contributors, it can drastically alter normal development from a person’s sense of self-worth, self-esteem, to feelings of acceptance. When the child identifies as the opposite sex, he or she is then diagnosed with gender dysphoria (often termed \"gender identity disorder\" or GID).\n\nGenetics vs. environmental contributors:\nThe development of gender roles has been associated with both genetic and social factors.\nCurrent biological research has suggested that testosterone differences can affect sexual orientation, gender identity, and personality. For example, girls with increased prenatal testosterone levels, due to congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), show more male-typed behaviors than the average female. This may cause a decrease in empathy levels, which is proven to be higher in the average women than men, and an increase in physical aggression, typically higher in men than women. Furthermore, multiple twin studies have also shown that homosexual traits displayed greater congruence in monozygotic (MZ) twins than dizygotic (DZ) twins displaying genetic contributions. Further studies reveal that this is especially true for girls' gender-typed values. Similarly, other studies have summarized that the prevalence of cross-gender behavior a highly heritable trait where MZ twins display the same cross-gender behaviors more so than DZ twins.\nWhile atypical gender role development may be heritable, this does not mean that it is independent. However, environmental effects can differ largely for different genders. Because society is more accepting of male traits (girls playing soccer) than female traits (boys doing ballet), society’s negativity typically forces males to try to stay within the stereotypic norms. That being said however, male influence accounted by environmental factors that lead to atypical development is also stronger for boys than girls in terms of atypical development.\n\nGender dysphoria:\nGender dysphoria or gender identity disorder (GID) occurs when the child identifies himself or herself as the opposite sex. GID, previously known as transsexualism, occurs when a person has a strong desire to be the opposite sex because they feel uncomfortable in their own body. This may lead to cross-dressing or the desire to rid of their physical characteristic. GID is accompanied with a distress that the individual cannot change their sex and a strong rejection for sex-typical behaviours. Onset of most of these behaviors occurs as early as two to four years of age.\n\nControversies about gender in DSM-5:\nFor the fifth edition of the \"Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders\" (DSM-5), there has been a tremendous amount of debate around whether the sexual and gender identity, which includes the GID, qualifies as a mental disorder. One of the most notable discussions for this occurred in 2003 during the annual APA meeting, where Darryl B. Hill, Ph.D., argued that the GID should not be considered a mental disorder. He explains that due to the limited amount of reliable and valid evidence, given the role of parents and therapies, for whether GID meets the conditions as a mental disorder among children and adolescents. Furthermore, other researchers have stated that the diagnosis does not give recognition to the individual’s discomfort with their biological sex which is completely detached from their gender assignment. This leaves patients susceptible to social changes for what acceptably feminine or masculine. Lastly, it does not provide evidence for nonconformity to traditional gender behaviours which varies between cultures, life stages, genders, and ethnic groups.\n\nAndrogyny:\nRecent studies have shown that androgynous people are able to enhance performance cross-situationally because they can alter their behaviors appropriately to becoming more “masculine” or “feminine” in the given context. According to a study, a person’s activity preference in games and interests are purely based on their gender-typed stereotypes, making the person significantly more stereotyped than androgynous people. In a self-esteem test, when individuals were given opposite-sex activities, gender-typed individuals generally felt more uncomfortable, leading to decreased levels of self-esteem. However, androgynous subjects did not feel discomfort or pessimism about themselves. Therefore, gender typing can often lead to specific gender-rule stereotypes to better facilitate decision making which can adhere to certain benefits as well as limitations. Therefore, parents who foster more non-traditional views in sex role orientation tend to encourage a less discriminatory environment. The child can then freely engage in more choices that are not affected by gender limitations. Androgynous children have been found to have higher self-esteem and higher self-worth.\n\nDrawbacks\nRecent studies have shown that gender typing is, in fact, not just related to gender-related characteristics that is congruous with the person’s biological sex, but rather holds different dimensions. Several studies have also revealed the perks of androgynous individuals such as having more adaptability towards gender-specific situations as well as more flexible attitudes about sex roles. Therefore, while there appear to be many benefits for a gender-congruent identity, it can also result in limitations. Because gender typing often reinforces stereotypes, it tends to attract negative and rigid attitudes towards atypical gender characteristics, activities, and interests. This reinforces the idea that gender-typing does result in certain limitations towards the construction of one’s identity.\n\nBoy Raised as Girl\nAfter a circumcision accident, Bruce’s parents turned to Psychologist Dr. John Money who suggested they raise the boy as a girl. Money believes that biology does not determine our gender identification; our environment does. At 17 months old, Bruce was renamed \"Brenda\". However, at age 13, \"Brenda\" became unhappy, lonely, and refused to pursue anything female-typed. Brenda’s parents chose to tell Brenda the truth, and from then on he named himself David. This story ended in tragedy; David committed suicide after his wife left him and he lost his job.\n\nKate:\nBen had never shown interest in “boy” toys, they wanted to wear girl’s clothing and grow long hair. Soon they started to make their gender clear: they talked about being a girl and their identity not matching anatomy. Finally, Ben told family they would go by Kate. In the beginning, the child lived a double life. In school, she was “Ben”; at home, she was Kate. Characteristics between the two identities drastically varied. Ben was quiet, shy and withdrawn, while Kate was extroverted and happy. Her parents could see that this was taking a toll on Kate and so they changed to a school where Kate could attend as herself. As the parent learned through this experience, supporting a child’s gender identity is extremely important.\n\nPop:\nIn Sweden, there is a couple who raised their child, Pop, by keeping the child’s gender a secret, despite a few people who changed the baby’s diaper. The parents stated that they wanted the baby to grow up free and without a gender mold. Pop’s wardrobe contains everything from pants to dresses. Pop’s parents avoid using pronouns and just refer to their child as “Pop.”\n", "id": "29880293", "title": "Gender typing"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31351275", "text": "Pulsatile flow\n\nIn fluid dynamics, a flow with periodic variations is known as pulsatile flow, or as Womersley flow. The flow profiles was first derived by John R. Womersley (1907–1958) in his work with blood flow in arteries. The cardiovascular system of chordate animals is a very good example where pulsatile flow is found, but pulsatile flow is also observed in engines and hydraulic systems, as a result of rotating mechanisms pumping the fluid.\n\nThe pulsatile flow profile is given in a straight pipe by\n\nwhere:\n\nThe pulsatile flow profile changes its shape depending on the Womersley number\n\nFor formula_3, viscous forces dominate the flow, and the pulse is considered quasi-static with a parabolic profile.\nFor formula_4, the inertial forces are dominant in the central core, whereas viscous forces dominate near the boundary layer. Thus, the velocity profile gets flattened, and phase between the pressure and velocity waves gets shifted towards the core.\n\nThe Bessel function at its lower limit becomes\n\nwhich converges to the Hagen-Poiseuille flow profile for steady flow for\n\nor to a quasi-static pulse with parabolic profile when\n\nIn this case, the function is real, because the pressure and velocity waves are in phase.\n\nThe Bessel function at its upper limit it becomes\n\nwhich converges to\n\nThis is highly reminiscent of the Stokes layer on an oscillating flat plate, or the skin-depth penetration of an alternating magnetic field into an electrical conductor.\nOn the surface formula_10, but the exponential term becomes negligible once formula_11 becomes large, the velocity profile becomes almost constant and independent of the viscosity. Thus, the flow simply oscillates as a plug profile in time according to the pressure gradient,\n\nHowever, close to the walls, in a layer of thickness formula_13, the velocity adjusts rapidly to zero. Furthermore, the phase of the time oscillation varies quickly with position across the layer. The exponential decay of the higher frequencies is faster.\n\nFor deriving the analytical solution of this non-stationary flow velocity profile, the following assumptions are taken:\n\nThus, the Navier-Stokes equation and the continuity equation are simplified as\n\nand\n\nrespectively. The pressure gradient driving the pulsatile flow is decomposed in Fourier series,\n\nwhere formula_17 is the imaginary number, formula_18 is the angular frequency of the first harmonic (i.e., formula_19), and formula_20 are the amplitudes of each harmonic formula_21. Note that, formula_22 (standing for formula_23) is the steady-state pressure gradient, whose sign is opposed to the steady-state velocity (i.e., a negative pressure gradient yields positive flow). Similarly, the velocity profile is also decomposed in Fourier series in phase with the pressure gradient, because the fluid is incompressible,\n\nwhere formula_25 are the amplitudes of each harmonic of the periodic function, and the steady component (formula_23) is simply Poiseuille flow\n\nThus, the Navier-Stokes equation for each harmonic reads as\n\nWith the boundary conditions satisfied, the general solution of this ordinary differential equation for the oscillatory part (formula_29) is\n\nwhere formula_31 is the Bessel function of first kind and order zero, formula_32 is the Bessel function of second kind and order zero, formula_33 and formula_34 are arbitrary constants, and formula_35 is the dimensionless Womersley number. The axisymetic boundary condition (formula_36) is applied to show that formula_37 for the derivative of above equation to be valid, as the derivatives formula_38 and formula_39 approach infinity. Next, the wall non-slip boundary condition (formula_40) yields formula_41. Hence, the amplitudes of the velocity profile of the harmonic formula_21 becomes\n\nwhere formula_44 is used for simplification.\nThe velocity profile itself is obtained by taking the real part of the complex function resulted from the summation of all harmonics of the pulse,\n\nFlow rate is obtained by integrating the velocity field on the cross-section. Since,\n\nthen\n\nTo compare the shape of the velocity profile, it can be assumed that\n\nwhere\n\nis the shape function.\nIt is important to notice that this formulation ignores the inertial effects. The velocity profile approximates a parabolic profile or a plug profile, for low or high Womersley numbers, respectively.\n\nFor straight pipes, wall shear stress is\n\nThe derivative of a Bessel function is\n\nHence,\n\nIf the pressure gradient formula_20 is not measured, it can still be obtained by measuring the velocity at the centre line. The measured velocity has only the real part of the full expression in the form of\n\nNoting that formula_55, the full physical expression becomes\n\nat the centre line. The measured velocity is compared with the full expression by applying some properties of complex number. For any product of complex numbers (formula_57), the amplitude and phase have the relations formula_58 and formula_59, respectively. Hence,\n\nand\n\nwhich finally yield\n\n", "id": "31351275", "title": "Pulsatile flow"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30906179", "text": "Allometric engineering\n\nAllometric engineering is the process of experimentally shifting the scaling relationships, for body size or shape, in a population of organisms. More specifically, the process of experimentally breaking the tight covariance evident among component traits of a complex phenotype by altering the variance of one trait relative to another. Typically, body size is one of the two traits. The measurements of the two traits are plotted against each other and the scaling relationship can be represented as: formula_1. Manipulations of this sort alter the scaling relationships either by shifting the intercept (\"b\"), slope (\"m\") or both to create novel variants (see: Allometry, for more details). These novel variants can then be tested for differences in performance or fitness. Through careful testing, one could sequentially test each component of a trait suite to determine how each part contributes to the function of the entire complex phenotype, and ultimately the fitness of the organism. This technique allows for comparison within or among biological groups differing in size by adjusting morphology to match one another and comparing their performances.\n\nAllometric engineering has been used to test David Lack's hypothesis in the lizard \"Sceloporus occidentalis\". In this study, two populations were \"engineered\" to fit the morphology of the other by manipulating egg yolk quantity, removing effect of size difference between groups. After manipulation, they found that speed was inversely proportional to body size.\n\nMaternal investment was \"allometrically engineered\" by surgically removing an ovary in cockroaches (\"Diploptera punctata\"). This effectively reduced number of progeny and increased resource allocation to each offspring. They coupled this manipulation with group effects (faster development in large groups), and found that maternal investment can overcome group effect.\n\nThe male long-tailed widowbird (\"Euplectes progne\") has exceptionally long tail feathers roughly half a meter in length. Male tail feathers were cropped and glued and those with artificially enhanced tail lengths secured the most matings, demonstrating female preference.\n\nThe fly \"Zonosemata vittigera\" has a banding pattern on its wings that was found to mimic movements of a jumping spider. Greene \"et al.\" engineered novel phenotypes, breaking correlation between a behavior and morphology, by cutting and transplanting the wings of this fly with the common housefly. This manipulation demonstrated that it was behavior coupled with the banding pattern that deterred jumping spiders from attacking, though not other predators.\n\nCurrent uses have involved truncation or cropping, yolk manipulation, hormonal treatments, maternal allocation, temperature manipulation, or altering the nutritional states. Each method undoubtedly has its merits and pitfalls to consider before designing an experiment, but these techniques are opening new avenues of research in comparative and evolutionary biology.\n\n", "id": "30906179", "title": "Allometric engineering"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32000094", "text": "Compensatory growth (organism)\n\nCompensatory growth, known as catch-up growth and compensatory gain, is an accelerated growth of an organism following a period of slowed development, particularly as a result of nutrient deprivation. The growth may be with respect to weight or length (or height in humans). For example, oftentimes the body weights of animals who experience nutritional restriction will over time become similar to those of animals who did not experience such stress. It is possible for high compensatory growth rates to result in overcompensation, where the organism exceeds normal weight and often has excessive fat deposition.\n\nAn organism can recover to normal weight without additional time. Sometimes when the nutrient restriction is severe, the growth period is extended to reach the normal weight. If the nutrient restriction is severe enough, the organism may have permanent stunted growth where it does not ever reach normal weight. Usually in animals, complete recovery from carbohydrate and protein restriction occurs.\n\nCompensatory growth has been observed in a number of organisms including humans, other species of mammals, birds, reptiles, fish, plants (especially grasses and young tree seedlings and saplings), fungi, microbes, and damselflies.\n\nIn 1911, Hans Aron performed the earliest study of growth after periods of undernourishment. He underfed a dog and found that it still had the capacity to rapidly gain weight, though it did not reach the final weight of a dog that was fed normally. In 1915, Osborne and Mendel were the first to demonstrate that rats fed after growth restriction had an accelerated growth rate. In 1945, Brody developed the idea of “homoestasis of growth” in the book \"Bioenergetics and Growth\". In 1955, Verle Bohman was the first to use the term “compensatory growth” in an article pertaining to beef cattle.\n\nIn animals, homeostatic and homeorhetic processes are involved in the abnormally high growth rates. Homeostatic processes usually affect compensatory growth in the short term, whereas homeorhetic processes usually have a long-term effect.\n\nThe exact biological mechanisms for compensatory growth are poorly understood, though it is clear that in some animals the endocrine system is involved in the metabolism and nutrient partitioning in the tissues.\nFirst, during nutrient starvation, a reduction of basal metabolism takes place. The gut tissues are the first tissues to be reduced in weight and activity. Then, during the realimentation (re-feeding) phase, an increase in feeding enables more dietary protein and energy to be contributed for tissue growth instead of basal metabolism. The gut tissues are the first to increase in weight, followed by muscle tissue and finally adipose tissue.\n\nAnorexia nervosa can have serious implications if its duration and severity are significant and if onset occurs before the completion of growth, pubertal maturation or prior to attaining peak bone mass. Both height gain and pubertal development are dependent on the release of growth hormone and gonadotrophins (LH and FSH) from the pituitary gland. Suppression of gonadotropins in patients with anorexia nervosa has been frequently documented. In some cases, especially where onset is pre-pubertal, physical consequences such as stunted growth and pubertal delay are usually fully reversible. Height potential is normally preserved if the duration and severity of anorexia nervosa are not significant and/or if the illness is accompanied with delayed bone age (especially prior to a bone age of approximately 15 years), as hypogonadism may negate the deleterious effects of undernutrition on stature by allowing for a longer duration of growth compared to controls. In such cases, appropriate early treatment can preserve height potential and may even help to increase it in some post-anorexic subjects due to the aforementioned reasons in addition to factors such as long-term reduced estrogen-producing adipose tissue levels compared to premorbid levels.\n\nIn 1960, Wilson and Osborne outlined six factors that could affect compensatory growth in a review article. The importance of each, some, or all of these factors is not well understood. These factors are as follows:\n\nAnimal factors that can affect compensatory growth may include the maturity level and fat proportion of the animal at the time of nutrient deprivation, the genotype, the gender, and the metabolic changes. The stage of development of the animal when the nutrient restriction occurs greatly affects its body composition.\n\n", "id": "32000094", "title": "Compensatory growth (organism)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35942883", "text": "Biological dark matter\n\nBiological dark matter is an informal term for genetic material or microorganisms that are unclassified or poorly understood.\n\nBiological dark matter includes non-coding DNA (junk DNA) and non-coding RNA. Much of the genomic dark matter is thought to originate from ancient transposable elements and from other low-complexity repetitive elements. Uncategorized genetic material is found in humans and in several other organisms. Their phylogenetic novelty could indicate the cellular organisms or viruses from which they evolved.\n\nBiologists are unable to culture and grow 99% of all living microorganisms, so few functional insights exist about the metabolic potential of these organisms.\n\n", "id": "35942883", "title": "Biological dark matter"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38045209", "text": "Despeciation\n\nDespeciation is the loss of a unique species of animal due to its combining with another previously distinct species. It is the opposite of Speciation and is much more rare. It is similar to extinction in that there is a loss of a unique species but without the associated loss of a biological lineage.\n\nFor example, Taylor et al.'s genetic analysis of three-spined sticklebacks across six lakes in southwestern British Columbia found two distinct species in 1977 and 1988 but only one combined species in data from 1997, 2000, and 2002. They concluded that external factors had imperiled the living conditions of the two species, thus eliminating the evolutionary specializations that had kept them unique.\n", "id": "38045209", "title": "Despeciation"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38523023", "text": "Unconventional protein secretion\n\nUnconventional protein secretion (known as ER/Golgi-independent protein secretion or nonclassical protein export ) represents a manner in which the proteins are delivered to the surface of plasma membrane or to extracellular matrix regardless of ER/Golgi- dependent protein secretion. This includes cytokines and mitogens with crucial function in complex processes such as inflammatory response or tumor-induced angiogenesis. Most of these proteins are involved in processes in higher eukaryotes, however unconventional export mechanism was found in lower eukaryotes too. Even proteins folded in their correct conformation can pass plasma membrane this way, unlike proteins transported via ER/Golgi pathway. Two types of unconventional protein secretion are these: signal-peptid-containing proteins and cytoplasmatic and nuclear proteins that are missing an ER-signal peptide (1).\n\nThese proteins contain a specific signal-peptide sequence, which is to be translated into the endoplasmic reticulum, but are, however, able to reach the cell surface unconventionally. They can be packed into COPII-coated vesicle and directly fuse with plasma membrane or can fuse with endosomal or lysosomal compartment. Alternatively they can be packed into non-COPII-coated vesicle as well and fuse with Golgi (before reaching plasma membrane) or directly delivered to plasma membrane.\n\nSoluble proteins can reach the surface of the cell both by non-vesicular and vesicular mechanism. Non-vesicular mechanism use a carrier to get protein into extracellular space (for example phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphoshate). Vesicular mechanism can use lysosome-dependent pathway, microvesicle shedding or biogenesis of multivesicular bodies.\n", "id": "38523023", "title": "Unconventional protein secretion"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38260038", "text": "Bridged nucleic acid\n\nBridged nucleic acids (BNAs) are modified RNA nucleotides. They are sometimes also referred to as constrained or inaccessible RNA molecules. BNA monomers can contain a five-membered, six-membered or even a seven-membered bridged structure with a “fixed” C’-endo sugar puckering. The bridge is synthetically incorporated at the 2’, 4’-position of the ribose to afford a 2’, 4’-BNA monomer. The monomers can be incorporated into oligonucleotide polymeric structures using standard phosphoamidite chemistry. BNAs are structurally rigid oligo-nucleotides with increased binding affinities and stability.\n\nChemical structures of BNA monomers containing a bridge at the 2’, 4’-position of the ribose to afford a 2’, 4’-BNA monomer as synthesized by Takeshi Imanishi’s group. The nature of the bridge can vary for different types of monomers. The 3D structures for A-RNA and B-DNA were used as a template for the design of the BNA monomers. The goal for the design was to find derivatives that possess high binding affinities with complementary RNA and/or DNA strands.\n\nThe presence of 2’-hydroxyls in the RNA backbone favors a structure that resembles the A-form structure of DNA. The flexible five-membered furanose ring in nucleotides exists in equilibrium of two preferred conformations of the N- (C’-endo, A-form) and the S-type (C’-endo, B-form) as illustrated in the next figure.\n\nAn increased conformational inflexibility of the sugar moiety in nucleosides (oligonucleotides) results in a gain of high binding affinity with complementary single-stranded RNA and/or double-stranded DNA. The first 2’,4’-BNA (LNA) monomers were first synthesized by Takeshi Imanishi’s group in 1997 followed independently by Jesper Wengel’s group in 1998.\nChemical structures of other BNAs that were synthesized in the past years as indicated below the structures.\n\nBNA nucleotides can be incorporated into DNA or RNA oligonucleotides at any desired position. Such oligomers are synthesized chemically and are now commercially available. The bridged ribose conformation enhances base stacking and pre-organizes the backbone of the oligonucleotide significantly increasing their hybridization properties. \nThe incorporation of BNAs into oligonucleotides allows the production of modified synthetic oligonucleotides with:\n\n\nChemical structures of BNAs were introduced in 2007 by Imanishi’s group. These new generation of BNAs analogues are called 2’,4’-BNA[NH], 2’,4’-BNA[NMe], and 2’,4’-BNA[NBn].\n\nNew BNA analogs introduced by Imanishi’s group were designed by taking the length of the bridged moiety into account. A six-membered bridged structure with a unique structural feature (N-O bond) in the sugar moiety was designed to have a nitrogen atom. This atom improves the formation of duplexes and triplexes by lowering the repulsion between the negatively charged backbone phosphates. These modifications allow to control the affinity towards complementary strands, regulate resistance against nuclease degradation and the synthesis of functional molecules designed for specific applications in genomics. The properties of these analogs were investigated and compared to those of previous 2’,4’-BNA (LNA) modified oligonucleotides by Imanishi’s group. Imanishi’s results show that “2’,4’-BNA-modified oligonucleotides with these profiles show great promise for applications in antisense and antigene technologies.”\n\nMakoto Koizumi in 2004 reviewed the properties of BNAs with focus on ENAs as antisense and antigen oligonucleotides (AONs) and proposed an action mechanism for these compounds that may involve translation arrest, mRNA degradation mediated by RNase H and splicing arrest. This is illustrated in the following figure.\n\nYamamoto et al. in 2012 demonstrated that BNA-based antisense therapeutics inhibited hepatic PCSK9 expression, resulting in a strong reduction of the serum LDL-C levels of mice. The findings supported the hypothesis that PCSK9 is a potential therapeutic target for hypercholesterolemia and the researchers were able to show that BNA-based antisense oligonucleotides (AONs) induced cholesterol-lowering action in hypercholesterolemic mice. A moderate increase of aspartate aminotransferase, ALT, and blood urea nitrogen levels was observed whereas the histopathological analysis revealed no severe hepatic toxicities. The same group, also in 2012, reported that the 2’,4’-BNA[NMe] analog when used in antisense oligonucleotides showed significantly stronger inhibitory activities which is more pronounced in shorter (13- to 16mer) oligonucleotides. Their data led the researchers to conclude that the 2’,4’-BNA[NMe] analog may be a better alternative to conventional LNAs.\n\nSome of the benefits of BNAs include:\n\nApplication of BNAs include:\n\n", "id": "38260038", "title": "Bridged nucleic acid"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39269199", "text": "Heterolysis (biology)\n\nIn biology, heterolysis refers to apoptosis induced by hydrolytic enzymes from surrounding (usually inflammatory) cells. Autolysis is apoptosis of a cell by its own enzymes.\n", "id": "39269199", "title": "Heterolysis (biology)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39269279", "text": "Homolysis (biology)\n\nIn biology, homolysis refers to a dividing cell resulting in two equal-size daughter cells.\n", "id": "39269279", "title": "Homolysis (biology)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39207238", "text": "Dorsal nexus\n\nThe dorsal nexus is an area within the dorsal medial prefrontal cortex that serves as an intersection point for multiple brain networks. Research suggests it plays a role in the maintenance and manipulation of information, as well as supporting the control of cognitive functions such as behavior, memory, and conflict resolution. Abnormally increased connectivity between these networks through the Dorsal Nexus has been associated with certain types of depression. The activity generated by this abnormally high level of connectivity during a depressive state can be identified through Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and Positron emission tomography (PET).\n\nThe brain's intrinsic connections are divided into different networks that enable communication between the different structures: The cognitive control network, or Executive network (EN), the affective network or somatic network, and the default mode network. These regions are dependent on the dorsal nexus to communicate.\n\nThe EN is located in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and lateral parietal cortex, and is responsible for the maintenance and manipulation of the information in working memory. The EN also plays an important role as support of adaptive, goal-directed behaviors, which is why it is colloquially referred to as \"the problem solver.\"\n\nThe affective (or salience) network includes connections between the limbic area and subcortical areas, and is important during fear and vigilance states, as well as for autonomic and visceral regulation. It also generates the somatic sensations that accompany emotions.\n\nThe default mode is most active when the brain is at rest, or when a person is communicating socially. Its activity decreases during the performance of cognitively demanding tasks.\n\nNeuroimaging studies have shown that many neurological diseases and psychiatric disorders are associated with abnormalities in the functional connectivity of neural networks. MRIs indicate that the dorsal nexus is responsible for connecting these networks, and this might explain how symptoms of depression are influenced by the state of brain networks. The increased connectivity can produce symptoms of decreased focus and increased vigilance, which can present as paranoia, rumination or autonomic, visceral and emotional imbalance.\n\nSubjects with depression were observed to have abnormal connectivity in the bilateral parahipocampal cortex, as well as an increase of hyperintensity of white matter. Increased default-mode network connectivity, mediated via a region of the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex, may underline the characteristics of depression. In this pathology, the dorsal nexus is strongly connected to the task-positive, task-negative and affective networks. The function of this node is to allow enhanced “cross-talk” between networks, and this may explain how the diverse symptoms seen in depression converge The dorsal nexus can be related to two different types of depression: decreased and major depression. It is important to mention that there is a big difference between these two types: With decreased depression, the connectivity between the cingulated subgenual cortex and amygdala, pale striatum, and medial thalamus is diminished. In the case of major depression, connectivity is normal. This could explain differences in response to drugs and psychotherapy.\n\nNeuroimaging techniques allow of imaging of the nervous system in vivo, and permit scientists to explore the structures and functions of the human brain. In neuropsychiatry, neuroimaging techniques such as MRI and Positron Emission Tomography allow the identification of different networks that are implicated in various pathologies.\n\nIn the case of depression, portions of three different networks (the cognitive control network, the default mode network and the affective network) which are related with conflict resolution, making decisions, behavior, regulate memory and future planning present increased function in MRI’s. These three increased connectivity networks converged specifically on the dorsal nexus. The dorsal nexus has extremely high connectivity with large regions including dorso lateral prefrontal cortex, dorso medial prefrontal cortex, ventral medial prefrontal cortex, pregenual an subgenual cortex, posterior cingulate, and precuneus. Because these networks can be determined for each individual based on the strength of correlation to an a priori seed location, group statistical differences in networks can be evaluated on an image – wide basis.\n\nTreating the symptoms of depression has the purpose of reduce and control the dysfunction that patients could have in any areas of their life. The choice of treatment is based on the needs of the patient and can include drugs, therapy and other similar treatments. Regardless of the chosen treatment, if is necessary to consider possible side effects .\nIn the case of depression associated with dorsal nexus and other associated structures, reducing the increased connectivity might play a critical role reducing depression symptomatology and thus represent a potential therapy target for affective disorders \n\nSince glutamate is the most abundant and major excitatory neurotransmitter in the brain, pathophysiological changes in glutamatergic signaling are likely to affect neurobehavioral plasticity, information processing and large-scales changes in functional brain connectivity.Ketamine, a fast-acting general anesthetic derived from phencyclidine and use as a pediatric inductor, plays a non-well known role in the neural network dynamics at the healthy brain . The administration of ketamine in abnormal brain has the potential of reduce the increased function of the networks that are seen in depression. The therapeutic potential of ketamine may be explained by reversing disturbances in the glutamatergic system and restoring parts of a disrupted neurobehavioral homeostasis where several structural, metabolic, and functional abnormalities have taken place. Long term ketamine treatments lead to cognitive impairment including problems of short-term memory, visual and verbal memory. On the other hand, short term treatments are generally well tolerated and any damage may be reversible.\n\nElectroconvulsive therapy (ECT) significantly reduces functional connectivity between the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (Dorsal nexus) and the anterior cingulate cortex, the medial prefrontal cortex, and other areas implicated in major depression. Although electroconvulsive therapy has been used as a treatment for depression since 1930, it has several side effects as loss of memory, confusion and difficulties in forming new memories. Because of this reasons, this kind of treatment is limited to severely damaged patients.\n", "id": "39207238", "title": "Dorsal nexus"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39392026", "text": "Modes of toxic action\n\nA mode of toxic action is a common set of physiological and behavioral signs that characterize a type of adverse biological response. A mode of action should not be confused with mechanism of action, which refer to the biochemical processes underlying a given mode of action. Modes of toxic action are important, widely used tools in ecotoxicology and aquatic toxicology because they classify toxicants or pollutants according to their type of toxic action. There are two major types of modes of toxic action: non-specific acting toxicants and specific acting toxicants. Non-specific acting toxicants are those that produce narcosis, while specific acting toxicants are those that are non-narcotic and that produce a specific action at a specific target site.\n\n result in narcosis; therefore, narcosis is a mode of toxic action. Narcosis is defined as a generalized depression in biological activity due to the presence of toxicant molecules in the organism. The target site and mechanism of toxic action through which narcosis affects organisms are still unclear, but there are hypotheses that support that it occurs through alterations in the cell membranes at specific sites of the membranes, such as the lipid layers or the proteins bound to the membranes. Even though continuous exposure to a narcotic toxicant can produce death, if the exposure to the toxicant is stopped, narcosis can be reversible.\n\nToxicants that at low concentrations modify or inhibit some biological process by binding at a specific site or molecule have a specific acting mode of toxic action. However, at high enough concentrations, toxicants with specific acting modes of toxic actions can produce narcosis that may or may not be reversible. Nevertheless, the specific action of the toxicant is always shown first because it requires lower concentrations.\n\nThere are several specific acting modes of toxic action:\n\nThe pioneer work of identifying the major categories of modes of toxic action (see description above) was conducted by investigators from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at the Duluth Laboratory using fish, reason why they named the categories as \"\" (FATS). They proposed the FATS by assessing the behavioral and physiological responses of the fish when subjected to toxicity tests, such as locomotive activities, body color, ventilation patterns, cough rate, heart rate, and others.\n\nIt has been proposed that modes of toxic action could be estimated by developing a data set of critical body residues (CBR). The CBR is the whole-body concentration of a chemical that is associated with a given adverse biological response and it is estimated using a partition coefficient and a bioconcentration factor. The whole-body residues are reasonable first approximations of the amount of chemical present at the toxic action site(s). Because different modes of toxic action generally appear to be associated with different ranges of body residues, modes of toxic action can then be separated into categories. However, it is unlikely that every chemical has the same mode of toxic action in every organism, so this variability should be considered. The effects of mixture toxicity should be considered as well, even though mixture toxicity it's generally additive, chemicals with more than one mode of toxic action may contribute to toxicity.\n\nModeling has become a common used tool to predict modes of toxic action in the last decade. The models are based in Quantitative Structure-Activity Relationships (QSARs), which are mathematical models that relate the biological activity of molecules to their chemical structures and corresponding chemical and physicochemical properties. QSARs can then predict modes of toxic action of unknown compounds by comparing its characteristic toxicity profile and chemical structure to reference compounds with known toxicity profiles and chemical structures. Russom and colleagues were one of the first group of researchers being able to classify modes of toxic action with the use of QSARs; they classified 600 chemicals as narcotics. Even though QSARs are a useful tool for predicting modes of toxic action, chemicals having multiple modes of toxic action can obscure QSAR analyses. Therefore, these models are continuously being developed.\n\nThe objective of environmental risk assessment is to protect the environment from adverse effects. Researchers are further developing QSAR models with the ultimate goal providing a clear insight about a mode of toxic action, but also about what the actual target site is, the concentration of the chemical at this target site, and the interaction occurring at the target site, as well as to predict the modes of toxic action in mixtures. Information on the mode of toxic action is crucial not only in understanding joint toxic effects and potential interactions between chemicals in mixtures, but also for developing assays for the evaluation of complex mixtures in the field.\n\nThe combination of behavioral and physiological responses, CBR estimates, and chemical fate and bioaccumulation QSAR models can be a powerful regulatory tool to address pollution and toxicity in areas where effluents are discharged.\n", "id": "39392026", "title": "Modes of toxic action"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39337116", "text": "Biomaterial Surface Modifications\n\nBiomaterials exhibit various degrees of compatibility with the harsh environment within a living organism. They need to be nonreactive chemically and physically with the body, as well as integrate when with tissue. The extent of compatibility varies based on the application and material required. Often modifications to the surface of a biomaterial system are required to maximize performance. The surface can be modified in many ways, including plasma modification and applying coatings to the substrate. Surface modifications can be used to affect surface energy, adhesion, biocompatibility, chemical inertness, lubricity, sterility, asepsis, thrombogenicity, susceptibility to corrosion, degradation, and hydrophilicity.\n\nTeflon is a hydrophobic polymer composed of a carbon chain saturated with fluorine atoms. The fluorine-carbon bond is largely ionic producing a strong dipole. The dipole prevents Teflon from being susceptible to Van der Waals forces, so other materials will not stick to the surface. Teflon is commonly used to reduce friction in biomaterial applications such as in arterial grafts, catheters, and guide wire coatings.\n\nPEEK is a semicrystalline polymer composed of benzene, ketone, and ether groups. PEEK is known for having good physical properties including high wear resistance and low moisture absorption and has been used for biomedical implants due to its relative inertness inside of the human body.\n\nPlasma modification is one way to alter the surface of biomaterials to enhance their properties. During plasma modification techniques, the surface is subjected to high levels of excited gases that alter the surface of the material. Plasma's are generally generated with a radio frequency (RF) field. Additional methods include applying a large (~1KV) DC voltage across electrodes engulfed in a gas. The plasma is then used to expose the biomaterial surface, which can break or form chemical bonds. This is the result of physical collisions or chemical reactions of the excited gas molecules with the surface. This changes the surface chemistry and therefore surface energy of the material which affects the adhesion, biocompatibility, chemical inertness, lubricity, and sterilization of the material. The table below shows several biomaterial applications of plasma treatments. \n\nThe surface energy is equal to the sum of disrupted molecular bonds that occur at the interface between two different phases. Surface energy can be estimated by contact angle measurements using a version of the Young–Laplace equation:\n\nformula_1 \n\nWhere formula_2 is the surface tension at the interface of solid and vapor, formula_3 is the surface tension at the interface of solid and liquid, and formula_4 is the surface tension at the interface of liquid and vapor. Plasma modification techniques alter the surface of the material, and subsequently the surface energy. Changes in surface energy then alter the surface properties of the material.\n\nSurface modification techniques have been extensively researched for the application of adsorbing biological molecules. Surface functionalization can be performed by exposing surfaces to RF plasma. Many gases can be excited and used to functionalize surfaces for a wide variety of applications. Common techniques include using air plasma, oxygen plasma, and ammonia plasma as well as other exotic gases. Each gas can have varying effects on a substrate. These effects decay with time as reactions with molecules in air and contamination occur. \n\nAmmonia plasma treatment can be used to attach amine functional groups. These functional groups lock on to anticoagulants like Heparin decreasing thrombogenicity.\n\nPolysaccharides have been used as thin film coatings for biomaterial surfaces. Polysaccharides are extremely hydrophilic and will have small contact angles. They can be used for a wide range of applications due to their wide range of compositions. They can be used to reduce the adsorption of proteins to biomaterial surfaces. Additionally, they can be used as receptor sites, targeting specific biomolecules. This can be used to activate specific biological responses.\n\nCovalent attachment to a substrate is necessary to immobilize polysaccharides, otherwise they will rapidly desorb in a biological environment. This can be a challenge due to the fact that the majority of biomaterials do not possess the surface properties to covalently attach polysaccharides. This can be achieved by the introduction of amine groups by RF glow discharge plasma. Gases used to form amine groups, including ammonia or n-heptylamine vapor, can be used to deposit a thin film coating containing surface amines. Polysaccharides must also be activated by oxidation of anhydroglucopyranoside subunits. This can be completed with sodium metaperiodate (NaIO). This reaction converts anhydroglucopyranoside subunits to cyclic hemiacetal structures, which can be reacted with amine groups to form a Schiff base linkage (a carbon-nitrogen double bond). These linkages are unstable and will easily dissociate. Sodium cyanoborohydride (NaBHCN) can be used as a stabilizer by reducing the linkages back to an amine.\n\nThere are many examples of contamination of biomaterials that are specific to the preparation or manufacturing process. Additionally, nearly all surfaces are prone to contamination of organic impurities in the air. Contamination layers are usually limited to a monolayer or less of atoms and are thus only detectable by surface analysis techniques, such as XPS. It is unknown whether this sort of contamination is harmful, yet it is still regarded as contamination and will most certainly affect surface properties.\n\nGlow discharge plasma treatment is a technique that is used for cleaning contamination from biomaterial surfaces. Plasma treatment has been used for various biological evaluation studies to increase the surface energy of biomaterial surfaces, as well as cleaning. Plasma treatment has also been proposed for sterilization of biomaterials for potential implants.\n\nAnother method of altering surface properties of biomaterials is to coat the surface. Coatings are used in many applications to improve biocompatibility and alter properties such as adsorption, lubricity, thrombogenicity, degradation, and corrosion.\n\nIn general, the lower the surface tension of a liquid coating, the easier it will be to form a satisfactory wet film from it. The difference between the surface tension of a coating and the surface energy of a solid substrate to which a coating is applied affects how the liquid coating flows out over the substrate. It also affects the strength of the adhesive bond between the substrate and the dry film. If for instance, the surface tension of the coating is higher than the surface tension of the substrate, then the coating will not spread out and form a film. As the surface tension of the substrate is increased, it will reach a point to where the coating will successfully wet the substrate but have poor adhesion. Continuous increase in the coating surface tension will result in better wetting in film formation and better dry film adhesion.\n\nMore specifically whether a liquid coating will spread across a solid substrate can be determined from the surface energies of the involved materials by using the following equation:\n\nformula_5\n\nWhere S is the coefficient of spreading, formula_6 is the surface energy of the substrate in air, formula_7 is the surface energy of the liquid coating in air and formula_8 is the interfacial energy between the coating and the substrate. If S is positive the liquid will cover the surface and the coating will adhere well. If S is negative the coating will not completely cover the surface, producing poor adhesion.\n\nOrganic coatings are a common way to protect a metallic substrate from corrosion. Up until ~1950 it was thought that coatings act as a physical barrier which disallows moisture and oxygen to contact the metallic substrate and form a corrosion cell. This cannot be the case because the permeability of paint films is very high. It has since been discovered that corrosion protection of steel depends greatly upon the adhesion of a noncorrosive coating when in the presence of water. With low adhesion, osmotic cells form underneath the coating with high enough pressures to form blisters, which expose more unprotected steel. Additional non-osmotic mechanisms have also been proposed. In either case, sufficient adhesion to resist displacement forces is required for corrosion protection.\n\nGuide wires are an example of an application for biomedical coatings. Guide wires are used in coronary angioplasty to correct the effects of coronary artery disease, a disease that allows plaque build up on the walls of the arteries. The guide wire is threaded up through the femoral artery to the obstruction. The guide wire guides the balloon catheter to the obstruction where the catheter is inflated to press the plaque against the arterial walls. Guide wires are commonly made from stainless steel or Nitinol and require polymer coatings as a surface modification to reduce friction in the arteries. The coating of the guide wire can affect the trackability, or the ability of the wire to move through the artery without kinking, the tactile feel, or the ability of the doctor to feel the guide wire's movements, and the thrombogenicity of the wire.\n\nHydrophilic coatings can reduce friction in the arteries by up to 83% when compared to bare wires due to their high surface energy. When the hydrophilic coatings come into contact with bodily fluids they form a waxy surface texture that allows the wire to slide easily through the arteries. Guide wires with hydrophilic coatings have increased trackability and are not very thrombogenic; however the low coefficient of friction increases the risk of the wire slipping and perforating the artery.\n\nTeflon and Silicone are commonly used hydrophobic coatings for coronary guide wires. Hydrophobic coatings have a lower surface energy and reduce friction in the arteries by up to 48%. Hydrophobic coatings do not need to be in contact with fluids to form a slippery texture. Hydrophobic coatings maintain tactile sensation in the artery, allowing doctors full control of the wire at all times and reducing the risk of perforation; though, the coatings are more thrombogenic than hydrophilic coatings. The thrombogenicity is due to the proteins in the blood adapting to the hydrophobic environment when they adhere to the coating. This causes an irreversible change for the protein, and the protein remains stuck to the coating allowing for a blood clot to form.\n\nUsing an MRI to image the guide wire during use would have an advantage over using x-rays because the surrounding tissue can be examined while the guide wire is advanced. Because most guide wires' core materials are stainless steel they are not capable of being imaged with an MRI. Nitinol wires are not magnetic and could potentially be imaged, but in practice the conductive nitinol heats up under the magnetic radiation which would damage surrounding tissues. An alternative that is being examined is to replace contemporary guide wires with PEEK cores, coated with iron particle embedded synthetic polymers.\n", "id": "39337116", "title": "Biomaterial Surface Modifications"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39310035", "text": "Dependence receptor\n\nIn cellular biology, dependence receptors are proteins that mediate programmed cell death by monitoring the absence of certain trophic factors (or, equivalently, the presence of anti-trophic factors) that otherwise serve as ligands (interactors) for the dependence receptors.\nA trophic ligand is a molecule whose protein binding stimulates cell growth, differentiation, and/or survival.\nCells depend for their survival on stimulation that is mediated by various receptors and sensors, and integrated via signaling within the cell and between cells. \nThe withdrawal of such trophic support leads to a form of cellular suicide.\n\nVarious dependence receptors are involved in a range of biological events: developmental cell death (naturally occurring cell death), trophic factor withdrawal-induced cell death, the spontaneous regression characteristic of type IV-S neuroblastoma, neurodegenerative cell death, inhibition of new tumor cells (tumorigenesis) and metastasis, and therapeutic antibody-mediated tumor cell death, as well as programmed cell death in other instances. \nSince these receptors may support either cell death or cell survival, they initiate a new type of tumor suppressor, a conditional tumor suppressor.\nIn addition, events such as cellular atrophy and process retraction may also be mediated by dependence receptors, although this has not been as well documented as the induction of programmed cell death.\n\nDependence receptors were first identified in 1993 in the laboratory of Dale Bredesen, and their importance in tumorigenesis first described by Mehlen, Bredesen, and their colleagues.\n\nThe following is the list of known dependence receptors:\n\nCells depend for their survival on stimulation that is mediated by various receptors and sensors. For any required stimulus, its withdrawal leads to a form of cellular suicide; that is, the cell plays an active role in its own demise. The term programmed cell death was first suggested by Lockshin & Williams in 1964.\nApoptosis, a form of programmed cell death, was first described by Kerr et al. in 1972, \nalthough the earliest references to the morphological appearance of such cells may date back to the late 19th century.\n\nCells require different stimuli for survival, depending on their type and state of differentiation. \nFor example, prostate epithelial cells require testosterone for survival, and the withdrawal of testosterone leads to apoptosis in these cells.\nHow do cells recognize a lack of stimulus? While positive survival signals are clearly important, a complementary form of signal transduction is pro-apoptotic, and is activated or propagated by stimulus withdrawal or by the addition of an “anti-trophin.”\n\nThe dependence receptor notion was based on the observation that the effects of a number of receptors that function in both nervous system development and the production of tumors (especially metastasis) cannot be explained simply by a positive effect of signal transduction induced by ligand binding, but rather must also include cell death signaling in response to trophic withdrawal.\n\nPositive survival signals involve classical signal transduction, initiated by interactions between ligands and receptors. Negative survival signals involve an alternative form of signal transduction that is initiated by the withdrawal of ligands from dependence receptors. This process is seen in developmental cell death, carcinogenesis (especially metastasis), neurodegeneration, and possibly non-lethal (sub-apoptotic) events such as neurite retraction and somal atrophy. Mechanistic studies of dependence receptors suggest that these receptors form complexes that activate and amplify caspase activity. In at least some cases, the caspase activation is via a pathway that is dependent on caspase-9 but not on mitochondria. \nSome of the downstream mediators have been identified, such as DAP kinase and the DRAL gene.\n\nDependence receptors display the common property that they mediate two different intracellular signals: in the presence of ligand, these receptors transduce a positive signal leading to survival, differentiation or migration; conversely, in the absence of ligand, the receptors initiate and/or amplify a signal for programmed cell death. Thus cells that express these proteins at sufficient concentrations manifest a state of dependence on their respective ligands. The signaling that mediates cell death induction upon ligand withdrawal is incompletely defined, but typically includes a required interaction with, and cleavage by, specific caspases. \nMutation of the caspase site(s) in the receptor, of which there is typically one or two, prevents the trophic ligand withdrawal-induced programmed cell death.\n\nComplex formation appears to be a function of ligand-receptor interaction, and dependence receptors appear to exist in at least two conformational states. \nComplex formation in the absence of ligand leads to caspase activation by a mechanism that is usually dependent on caspase cleavage of the receptor itself, releasing pro-apoptotic peptides. \nThus these receptors may serve in caspase amplification, and in so doing create cellular states of dependence on their respective ligands.\nThese states of dependence are not absolute, since they can be blocked downstream in some cases by the expression of anti-apoptotic genes such as Bcl-2 or P35. \nHowever, they result in a shift toward an increased likelihood of a cell's undergoing apoptosis.\n\nResearch has highlighted the role of the dependence receptor UNC5D in the phenomenon of spontaneous regression of type IV-S neuroblastoma.\nTrkA and TrkC have been shown to function as dependence receptors,\n\nwith TrkC mediating both neural cell death and tumorigenesis.\nIn addition, although dependence receptors have been described as mediating programmed cell death in the absence of binding of trophic ligand, the possibility that a similar effect might be achieved by the binding of a physiological anti-trophin has been raised, and it has been suggested that the Alzheimer's disease-associated peptide, Aβ, may play such a role.\n\n\n", "id": "39310035", "title": "Dependence receptor"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39984881", "text": "Phytogeomorphology\n\nPhytogeomorphology is the study of how terrain features affect plant growth. It was the subject of a treatise by Howard and Mitchell in 1985, who were considering the growth and varietal temporal and spatial variability found in forests, but recognized that their work also had application to farming, and the relatively new science (at that time) of precision agriculture. The premise of Howard and Mitchell is that landforms, or features of the land's 3D topography significantly affect how and where plants (or trees in their case) grow. Since that time, the ability to map and classify landform shapes and features has increased greatly. The advent of GPS has made it possible to map almost any variable one might wish to measure. Thus, a very increased awareness of the spatial variability of the environment that plants gown in has arisen. The development of technology like airborne LiDAR has enabled the detailed measurement of landform features to better than sub-meter, and when combined with RTK-GPS (accuracies to 1mm) enables the creation of very accurate maps of where these features are. Comparison of these landform maps with mapping of variables related to crop or plant growth show a strong correlation (see below for examples and references for precision agriculture).\n\nWhile phytogeomorphology is a broad term that applies to the relationship between plants and terrain attributes in general (see Howard et al., (1985)), it is also very applicable to the aspect of precision agriculture that studies crop growth temporal and spatial variability within farm fields. There is already a volume of work, although they don't use the term phytogeomorphology specifically, that considers farm field terrain attributes as affecting crop yield and growth, Moore et al. (1991) provide an early overview of the application of terrain features to precision agriculture, but one of the earliest references to this phenomenon in farming is that of Whittaker in 1967. More recent work includes a six-year study of temporal and spatial yield stability over 11 years (Kaspar et al., (2003), and references therein), and a detailed study of the same on a small patch farm in Portugal (and references therein). This variability can be exploited to produce higher yields and reduce the environmental impact of farming - consequently returning a higher profit to the farmer in terms of higher overall yields and lesser amounts of inputs. The new science of Sustainable Intensification of Agriculture which is addressing the need for higher yields from existing fields can be fulfilled by some of the practical applications of phytogeomorphology applied to precision agriculture.\n\nWork in this area has been happening for some years (see Reuter et al., (2005), Marquas de Silva et al., (2008), and especially Moore et al., (1991)), but it is slow and sometimes tedious work that necessarily involves multiple years of data, very specialized software tools, and long compute times to produce the resulting maps.\n\nTypically, the objective of precision agriculture is to divide the farm field into distinct management zones based on yield performance at each point in the field. 'Variable rate technology' is a relatively new term in farming technology that refers to spreaders, seeders, sprayers, etc. that are able to adjust their rates of flow on the fly. The idea is to create a 'recipe map' for variable rate farm machinery to deliver the exact quantity of amendments required at that location (within that zone of the field). The literature is divided on how to properly define management zones.\n\nIn the geomorphological approach to defining management zones it is found that topography aids in at least partially defining how much yield comes from which part of the field. This is true in fields where there are permanently limiting characteristics to parts of the field, but not true in fields where the growth potential is the same all over the field (Blackmore et al., (2003)). It can be shown that an index map of yield (shows areas of consistent over-performance of yield and areas of consistent under-performance) correlates well with a landform classification map (personal communication, Aspinall (2011)). Landforms can be classified a number of ways, but the simplest to use software tool is LandMapR (MacMillan (2003)). An early version of the LandMapR software is available through the Opengeomorphometry project hosted under the Google Code project.\n\n", "id": "39984881", "title": "Phytogeomorphology"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40624269", "text": "Trabecular cartilage\n\nTrabecular cartilages (trabeculae cranii, sometimes simply trabeculae, prechordal cartilages) are paired, rod-shaped cartilages, which develop in the head of the vertebrate embryo. They are the primordia of the anterior part of the cranial base, and are derived from the cranial neural crest cells.\n\nThe trabecular cartilages generally appear as a paired, rod-shaped cartilages at the ventral side of the forebrain and lateral side of the adenohypophysis in the vertebrate embryo. During development, their anterior ends fuse and form the \"trabecula communis\". Their posterior ends fuse with the caudal-most parachordal cartilages.\n\nMost skeletons are of mesodermal origin in vertebrates. Especially axial skeletal elements, such as the vertebrae, are derived from the paraxial mesoderm (e.g., somites), which is regulated by molecular signals from the notochord. Trabecular cartilages, however, originate from the neural crest, and since they are located anterior to the rostral tip of the notochord, they cannot receive signals from the notochord. Due to these specialisations, and their essential role in cranial development, many comparative morphologists and embryologists have argued their developmental or evolutionary origins. The general theory is that the trabecular cartilage is derived from the neural crest mesenchyme which fills anterior to the mandibular arch (premandibular domain).\n\nAs clearly seen in the lamprey, Cyclostome also has a pair of cartilaginous rods in the embryonic head which is similar to the trabecular cartilages in jawed vertebrates.\nHowever, in 1916, Alexej Nikolajevich Sewertzoff pointed out that the cranial base of the lamprey is exclusively originated from the paraxial mesoderm. Then in 1948, reported the detail of the skeletogenesis of the lamprey, and showed that the “trabecular cartilages” in lamprey appear just beside the notochord, in a similar position to the parachordal cartilages in jawed vertebrates. Recent experimental studies also showed that the cartilages are derived from the head mesoderm. The “trabecular cartilages” in the Cyclostome is no longer considered to be the homologue of the trabecular in the jawed vertebrates: the (true) trabecular cartilages were firstly acquired in the Gnathostome lineage.\n\nThe trabecular cartilages were first described in the grass snake by at 1839. In 1874, Thomas Henry Huxley suggested that the trabecular cartilages are a modified part of the splanchnocranium: they arose as the serial homologues of the pharyngeal arches.\n\nThe vertebrate jaw is generally thought to be the modification of the mandibular arch (1st pharyngeal arch). Since the trabecular cartilages appear anterior to the mandibular arch, if the trabecular cartilages are serial homologues of the pharyngeal arches, ancestral vertebrates should possess more than one pharyngeal arch (so-called \"premandibular arches\") anterior to the mandibular arch. The existence of premandibular arch(es) has been accepted by many comparative embryologists and morphologists (e.g., Edwin Stephen Goodrich, Gavin de Beer). Moreover, reported premandibular arches and the corresponding branchiomeric nerves by the reconstruction of the Osteostracans (e.g., \"Cephalaspis\"; recently this arch was reinterpreted as the mandibular arch)\n\nHowever, the existence of the premandibular arch(es) has been rejected, and the trabecular cartilages are no longer assumed to be one of the pharyngeal arches.\n\n", "id": "40624269", "title": "Trabecular cartilage"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=790808", "text": "Endogeny (biology)\n\nEndogenous substances and processes are those that originate from within an organism, tissue, or cell.\n\nEndogenous viral elements are DNA sequences derived from viruses that are ancestrally inserted into the genomes of germ cells. These sequences, which may be fragments of viruses or entire viral genomes (proviruses), can persist in the germline, being passed on from one generation to the next as host alleles.\n\nEndogenous processes include senescence, the menstrual cycle and the self-sustained circadian rhythms of plants and animals.\n\nIn some biological systems, endogeneity pertains to the recipient of DNA (usually in prokaryotes). However, because of homeostasis, discerning between internal and external influences is often difficult.\n\nEndogenous transcription factors are those manufactured by the cell, as distinguished from cloned transcription factors.\n\nThe word endogenous \n\n", "id": "790808", "title": "Endogeny (biology)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65132", "text": "Inverted repeat\n\nAn inverted repeat (or IR) is a single stranded sequence of nucleotides followed downstream by its reverse complement. The intervening sequence of nucleotides between the initial sequence and the reverse complement can be any length including zero. When the intervening length is zero, the composite sequence is a palindromic sequence. For example, is an inverted repeat sequence.\n\nBoth inverted repeats and direct repeats constitute types of nucleotide sequences that occur repetitively. These repeated DNA sequences often range from a pair of nucleotides to a whole gene, while the proximity of the repeat sequences varies between widely dispersed and simple tandem arrays. The short tandem repeat sequences may exist as just a few copies in a small region to thousands of copies dispersed all over the genome of most eukaryotes. Repeat sequences with about 10–100 base pairs are known as minisatellites, while shorter repeat sequences having mostly 2–4 base pairs are known as microsatellites. The most common repeats include the dinucleotide repeats, which have the bases AC on one DNA strand, and GT on the complementary strand. Some elements of the genome with unique sequences function as exons, introns and regulatory DNA. Though the most familiar loci of the repetitive sequences are the centromere, and the telomere, a large portion of the repeated sequences in the genome are found among the noncoding DNA.\n\nInverted repeats have a number of important biological functions. They define the boundaries in transposons and indicate regions capable of self-complementary base pairing (regions within a single sequence which can base pair with each other). These properties play an important role in genome instability and contribute not only to cellular evolution and genetic diversity but also to mutation and disease. In order to study these effects in detail, a number of programs and databases have been developed to assist in discovery and annotation of inverted repeats in various genomes.\n\nBeginning with this initial sequence:\n\nThe complement created by base pairing is:\n\nThe reverse complement is:\n\nAnd, the inverted repeat sequence is:\n\n\"nnnnnn\" represents any number of intervening nucleotides.\n\nA direct repeat occurs when a sequence is repeated with the same pattern downstream. There is no inversion and no reverse complement associated with a direct repeat. The nucleotide sequence written in bold characters signifies the repeated sequence. It may or may not have intervening nucleotides.\nLinguistically, a typical direct repeat is comparable to saying \"bye-bye\".\n\nAn inverted repeat sequence with no intervening nucleotides between the initial sequence and its downstream reverse complement is a palindrome.     EXAMPLE:\n        Step 1: start with an inverted repeat: \n        Step 2: remove intervening nucleotides: \n        This resulting sequence is palindromic because it is the reverse complement of itself.\n\nThe diverse genome-wide repeats are derived from transposable elements, which are now understood to \"jump\" about different genomic locations, without transferring their original copies. Subsequent shuttling of the same sequences over numerous generations ensures their multiplicity throughout the genome. The limited recombination of the sequences between two distinct sequence elements known as conservative site-specific recombination (CSSR) results in inversions of the DNA segment, based on the arrangement of the recombination recognition sequences on the donor DNA and recipient DNA. Again, the orientation of two of the recombining sites within the donor DNA molecule relative to the asymmetry of the intervening DNA cleavage sequences, known as the crossover region, is pivotal to the formation of either inverted repeats or direct repeats. Thus, recombination occurring at a pair of inverted sites will invert the DNA sequence between the two sites. Very stable chromosomes have been observed with comparatively fewer numbers of inverted repeats than direct repeats, suggesting a relationship between chromosome stability and the number of repeats.\nTerminal inverted repeats have been observed in the DNA of various eukaryotic transposons, even though their source remains unknown. Inverted repeats are principally found at the origins of replication of cell organism and organelles that range from phage plasmids, mitochondria, and eukaryotic viruses to mammalian cells. The replication origins of the phage G4 and other related phages comprise a segment of nearly 139 nucleotide bases that include three inverted repeats that are essential for replication priming.\n\nTo a large extent, portions of nucleotide repeats are quite often observed as part of rare DNA combinations. The three main repeats which are largely found in particular DNA constructs include the closely precise homopurine-homopyrimidine inverted repeats, which is otherwise referred to as H palindromes, a common occurrence in triple helical H conformations that may comprise either the TAT or CGC nucleotide triads. The others could be described as long inverted repeats having the tendency to produce hairpins and cruciform, and finally direct tandem repeats, which commonly exist in structures described as slipped-loop, cruciform and left-handed Z-DNA.\n\nPast studies suggest that repeats are a common feature of eukaryotes unlike the prokaryotes and archaea. Other reports suggest that irrespective of the comparative shortage of repeat elements in prokaryotic genomes, they nevertheless contain hundreds or even thousands of large repeats. Current genomic analysis seem to suggest the existence of a large excess of perfect inverted repeats in many prokaryotic genomes as compared to eukaryotic genomes. Recently (2017) was found that inverted repeats are present in DNA of all mitochondrial genomes (sequenced so far) and are enriched especially in important regulatory regions like replication origin and D-loops.\n\nPseudoknots are common structural motifs found in RNA. They are formed by two nested stem-loops such that the stem of one structure is formed from the loop of the other. There are multiple folding topologies among pseudoknots and great variation in loop lengths, making them a structurally diverse group.\n\nInverted repeats are a key component of pseudoknots as can be seen in the illustration of a naturally occurring pseudoknot found in the human telomerase RNA component. Four different sets of inverted repeats are involved in this structure. Sets 1 and 2 are the stem of stem-loop A and are part of the loop for stem-loop B. Similarly, sets 3 and 4 are the stem for stem-loop B and are part of the loop for stem-loop A.\n\nPseudoknots play a number of different roles in biology. The telomerase pseudoknot in the illustration is critical to that enzyme's activity. The ribozyme for the \"hepatitis delta virus (HDV)\" folds into a double-pseudoknot structure and self-cleaves its circular genome to produce a single-genome-length RNA. Pseudoknots also play a role in programmed ribosomal frameshifting found in some viruses and required in the replication of retroviruses.\n\nInverted repeats play an important role in riboswitches, which are RNA regulatory elements that control the expression of genes that produce the mRNA, of which they are part. A simplified example of the flavin mononucleotide (FMN) riboswitch is shown in the illustration. This riboswitch exists in the mRNA transcript and has several stem-loop structures upstream from the coding region. However, only the key stem-loops are shown in the illustration, which has been greatly simplified to help show the role of the inverted repeats. There are multiple inverted repeats in this riboswitch as indicated in green (yellow background) and blue (orange background). \n\nIn the absence of FMN, the Anti-termination structure is the preferred conformation for the mRNA transcript. It is created by base-pairing of the inverted repeat region circled in red. When FMN is present, it may bind to the loop and prevent formation of the Anti-termination structure. This allows two different sets of inverted repeats to base-pair and form the Termination structure. The stem-loop on the 3' end is a transcriptional terminator because the sequence immediately following it is a string of uracils (U). If this stem-loop forms (due to the presence of FMN) as the growing RNA strand emerges from the RNA polymerase complex, it will create enough structural tension to cause the RNA strand to dissociate and thus terminate transcription. The dissociation occurs easily because the base-pairing between the U's in the RNA and the A's in the template strand are the weakest of all base-pairings. Thus, at higher concentration levels, FMN down-regulates its own transcription by increasing the formation of the termination structure.\n\nInverted repeats are often described as \"hotspots\" of eukaryotic and prokaryotic genomic instability. Long inverted repeats are deemed to greatly influence the stability of the genome of various organisms. This is exemplified in \"E. coli\", where genomic sequences with long inverted repeats are seldom replicated, but rather deleted with rapidity. Again, the long inverted repeats observed in yeast greatly favor recombination within the same and adjacent chromosomes, resulting in an equally very high rate of deletion. Finally, a very high rate of deletion and recombination were also observed in mammalian chromosomes regions with inverted repeats. Reported differences in the stability of genomes of interrelated organisms are always an indication of a disparity in inverted repeats. The instability results from the tendency of inverted repeats to fold into hairpin- or cruciform-like DNA structures. These special structures can hinder or confuse DNA replication and other genomic activities. Thus, inverted repeats lead to special configurations in both RNA and DNA that can ultimately cause mutations and disease.\n\nThe illustration shows an inverted repeat undergoing cruciform extrusion. DNA in the region of the inverted repeat unwinds and then recombines, forming a four-way junction with two stem-loop structures. The cruciform structure occurs because the inverted repeat sequences self-pair to each other on their own strand.\n\nExtruded cruciforms can lead to frameshift mutations when a DNA sequence has inverted repeats in the form of a palindrome combined with regions of direct repeats on either side. During transcription, slippage and partial dissociation of the polymerase from the template strand can lead to both deletion and insertion mutations. Deletion occurs when a portion of the unwound template strand forms a stem-loop that gets \"skipped\" by the transcription machinery. Insertion occurs when a stem-loop forms in a dissociated portion of the nascent (newly synthesized) strand causing a portion of the template strand to be transcribed twice.\n\nImperfect inverted repeats can lead to mutations through intrastrand and interstrand switching. The antithrombin III gene's coding region is an example of an imperfect inverted repeat as shown in the figure on the right.\nThe stem-loop structure forms with a bump at the bottom because the G and T do not pair up. A strand switch event could result in the G (in the bump) being replaced by an A which removes the \"imperfection\" in the inverted repeat and provides a stronger stem-loop structure. However, the replacement also creates a point mutation converting the GCA codon to ACA. If the strand switch event is followed by a second round of DNA replication, the mutation may become fixed in the genome and lead to disease. Specifically, the missense mutation would lead to a defective gene and a deficiency in antithrombin which could result in the development of venous thromboembolism (blood clots within a vein).\n\nMutations in the collagen gene can lead to the disease Osteogenesis Imperfecta, which is characterized by brittle bones. In the illustration, a stem-loop formed from an imperfect inverted repeat is mutated with a thymine (T) nucleotide insertion as a result of an inter- or intrastrand switch. The addition of the T creates a base-pairing \"match up\" with the adenine (A) that was previously a \"bump\" on the left side of the stem. While this addition makes the stem stronger and perfects the inverted repeat, it also creates a frameshift mutation in the nucleotide sequence which alters the reading frame and will result in an incorrect expression of the gene.\nThe following list provides information and external links to various programs and databases for inverted repeats:\n\n", "id": "65132", "title": "Inverted repeat"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26305461", "text": "Parabiosis\n\nParabiosis, meaning \"living beside\", is a technical term in various contexts in fields of study related to ecology and physiology. It accordingly has been defined independently in at least three disciplines, namely experimental or medical physiology, the ecology of inactive physiological states, and the ecology of certain classes of social species that share nests.\n\nParabiosis derives most directly from new Latin, but the Latin in turn derives from two classical Greek roots. The first is \"παρά\" (\"para\") for \"beside\" or \"next to\". In modern etymology, this root appears in various senses, such as \"close to\", \"outside of\", and \"different\".\n\n\nThe second classical Greek root from which the Latin derives is \"βίος\" (\"bios\"), meaning \"life\".\n\nIn the field of experimental physiology, parabiosis is a class of techniques in which two living organisms are joined together surgically and develop single, shared physiological systems, such as a shared circulatory system. Through surgically connecting two animals, researchers can prove that the feedback system in one animal is circulated and affects the second animal via blood and plasma exchange. Total blood volume is exchanged approximately ten times per day in rat experiments using parabiosis. One limitation of the experiments is that outbred rats cannot be used because it can lead to a significant loss of pairs due to intoxication of the blood supply from a dissimilar rat.\n\nIn the mid-1800s, parabiotic experiments were pioneered by Paul Bert. He postulated that surgically connected animals could share a circulatory system. Bert was awarded the Prize of Experimental Physiology of the French Academy of Science in 1866 for his discoveries. Parabiotic experiments were scarcely revisited until the 20th century.\n\nMany of the parabiotic experiments since 1950 involve research regarding metabolism. One of these experiments was published in 1959 by G. R. Hervey in the \"Journal of Physiology\". This experiment was to support the theory that damage to the hypothalamus, particularly the ventromedial hypothalamus, leads to obesity caused by the overconsumption of food. This results from the ventromedial hypothalamus failing to respond to physiological signals that suppress appetite. The result is attributed to the feedback control system in the brain. Rats in the study were from the same litter, which had been a closed colony for multiple years. The two rats in each pair had no more than 3% difference in weight. Rats were paired at four weeks old. Unpaired rats were used as controls. The rats were conjoined in three ways. First, the peritoneal cavities were opened and connected between the two rats. Later, to avoid the risk of tangling the two rats’ intestines together, smaller cuts were made. After more refinement of the experimental procedure, the abdominal cavities were not opened and the rats were conjoined at the hip bone with minimal cutting. In order to prove that the two animals were sharing blood, researchers injected dye into the veins of one rat and the pigment would show up in the conjoined rat. It was necessary to verify the exchange of blood and plasma. The scientists refined the lesion placement by practicing the procedure on other rats. The rats were killed with ether and weighed at the conclusion of the experiment and the amount of fat in each animal was quantified.\n\nMany of the parabiotic pairs died throughout the experiment before its conclusion. In each pair, one rat became obese and exhibited hyperphagia. The weight of the rat with the surgical lesion rose rapidly for a few months, then reached a plateau as a direct result of the surgical procedure. After the procedure, the rat with the impaired hypothalamus voraciously ate and the paired rat decreased their appetite. The paired rat became obviously thin throughout the experiment, even rejecting food when it was offered. Some of the paired rats starved to death. Lesions subsequently made in the hypothalamus of two paired rats resulted in hyperphagia and obesity. That result verifies that the paired rat decreased its eating in a direct response to the signals in the blood from the rat with the lesion. If its brain was similarly altered, it also ate voraciously and became obese. The control rats who were given surgical lesions in the hypothalamus became similarly obese to the parabiotic counterparts.\n\nLater studies linked the effects of the previous parabiotic experiments about metabolism to the discovery of leptin. Many hormones and metabolites were proven to not be the satiety factor that caused one rat to starve in the experiments. Leptin seemed like a viable candidate. Starting in 1977, Ruth B.S. Harris, a graduate student under Hervey, repeated previous studies about parabiosis in rats and mice. Due to the discovery of leptin, she analyzed leptin concentrations of the mice in the parabiotic experiments. After injecting leptin into the obese mouse of each pair, she found that leptin circulated between the conjoined animals, but the circulation of leptin took some time to reach equilibrium. As a result of the injections, almost immediate weight loss resulted in the parabiotic pairs due to increased inhibition. Approximately 50–70% of fat was lost in the pairs. The obese mouse lost only fat. The lean mouse lost muscle mass and fat. Harris concluded that leptin levels are increased in the obese animal, but other factors could also affect the animals. Also, leptin was determined to decrease fat storage in both the obese and thin animals.\n\nParabiotic experiments have also been used to study diabetes. Douglas Coleman did further parabiotic experiments to determine diabetic chromosomal relationships. A major gene that causes obesity in mice was identified on chromosome 6. The obese gene (ob/ob) was determined from one mutant mouse, discovered in 1950. Coleman and researchers further identified a gene on chromosome 4 that led to hyperphagia and obesity in mice. The gene also correlated to the severe onset of diabetes (db/db gene). The experimenters used parabiosis to conjoin a db/db mouse to a normal mouse, and the normal mouse would starve to death after one week. The db/db mouse would still have a high blood sugar and food in its system. The db/db mouse was determined to have a satiety factor so potent that the other mouse would starve to death. A db/db mouse was conjoined with an ob/ob mouse and the result was the same as the first experiment. The obese mouse starved in 20–30 days, similar to the thin counterpart in the first experiment. The db/db mutant mouse overproduced a satiety factor but could not respond to it, perhaps due to a defective receptor, whereas the ob/ob mutant recognized and responded to the factor but could not reproduce it. Further studies with db/db mice with lesions in the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus suggested that the receptor for the satiety factor was found in these brain receptors.\n\nEarly parabiotic experiments also included cancer research. One study, published in 1966 by Friedell, studied the effects of radiation with X-rays on ovarian tumors. To study the tumors, two adult female rats were conjoined. The left rat was shielded and the right rat was exposed to high levels of radiation. The rats were given a controlled amount of food and water for the remainder of their natural lives. After death, the rats were autopsied and 149 of 328 pairs showed the presence of possible ovarian tumors in one or both of the two animals. This result matched previous studies of single rats. Since Friedell’s experiment, other parabiotic experiments have been useful in researching many types of cancer.\n\nChronic diseases of age have been saluted as prime candidates for parabiotic research because of the potential to conjoin an older animal with a younger animal. This process could be used to research cardiovascular disease, diabetes, osteoarthritis, and Alzheimer’s disease. As animals age, their oligodendrocytes reduce in efficiency, resulting in decreased myelination, causing negative effects on the central nervous system (CNS). Julia Ruckh and fellow researchers have used parabiosis to study remyelination from adult stem cells to see if conjoining young with older mice could reverse or delay this process. In the experiment, the two mice were conjoined and demyelination was induced via injection into the older mice. The experiment determined that factors from the younger mice reversed CNS demyelination in older mice by revitalizing the oligodendrocytes. The monocytes from the younger mice also enhanced the ability of the older mice to clear myelin debris because the young monocytes can clear lipids from myelin sheaths more effectively than older monocytes. The conjoining of the two animals reversed the effects of age on the myelination cells. The ability of the young mouse’s cells was unaffected. Enhanced immunity from the younger mouse also promoted the general health of the older mouse in each pair. The results of this experiment could lead to therapy processes for people with demyelinating diseases like multiple sclerosis.\n\nParabiotic research can be controversial. Due to accusations of animal cruelty, the practice is now shunned in many countries. Compared to other research techniques, there are relatively few parabiotic experiments. Some scientists argue for the benefits of parabiotic research. Eggel and Wyss-Coray argue that conjoining animals mimics naturally occurring parabiosis in nature due to the shared blood supply of conjoined twins. The experiments give insight into the way that bodily systems circulate, which has led to many advances in the study of a variety of diseases. Parabiotic experiments have been used to study obesity, chronic diseases of age, stem cell research, tissue regeneration, diabetes, transplants, tumor biology, and endocrinology.\n\nA two-year human trial to evaluate the beneficial effects of infusions of plasma from young donors (16–25 years of age) using blood biomarkers was started in June 2016 in Monterey, California. A panel of age-associated biomarkers will be measured before and after treatment, representing a spectrum of physiologic pathways with evidence-based connections to aging.\n\nOther than in experimental physiology, the term also is applicable to spontaneously occurring conditions such as in conjoined twins.\n\nLogically the word parabiosis would be equally applicable to various forms of parasitism such as the obligate parasitic reproduction of Anglerfish of the family Ceratiidae, in which the circulatory systems of the males and females unite completely. Without the attachment of males to a female, the endocrine functions cannot mature, the individuals fail to develop properly and die young and without reproducing.\n\nSimilarly, in plants growing closely together roots or stems in intimate contact sometimes form natural grafts. More commonly, in parasitic plants such as mistletoe and dodder the haustoria unite the circulatory systems of the host and the parasite so intimately that parasitic twiners such as \"Cassytha\" may act as vectors carrying disease organisms from one host plant to another.\n\nParabiosis as a term also applies to the states assumed by many organisms in various kingdoms of life, such as some bacteria, the bear animalcules (Tardigrada), and Rotifera. At least some members of all these taxa can survive drying out, often for decades or longer. Some bacteria, such as those causing anthrax, produce inactive, resistant spores that survive underground for many years. The eggs of some animals, such as Anostraca, the brine shrimps and their close relatives, have resistant shells and can survive in seasonally dried-out pools. In such a state the organisms show no sign of life until suitable conditions return. In this sense the \"para\" root apparently refers to the state as being \"outside\" of life.\n\nIn the late 19th century the first examples were discovered, of colonies of ants that more or less routinely shared their nests with essentially unrelated species of ants. They did not obviously share anything beyond the upkeep of the nests, even segregating their brood, so these were a very surprising observations; most ants are radically intolerant of intruders, usually including even intruders of their own species.\n\nIn the early 20th century Auguste-Henri Forel coined the term \"parabiosis\" for such associations, and it was adopted by the likes of William Morton Wheeler. The term has remained in currency, for example: \"Parabiosis is defined as a special symbiosis, so far known only from a few Neotropical ant species, in which two or more species occupy the same nest site and forage together while keeping brood separate\".\n\nAs is to be expected in matters concerning ethology and ecology however, such a class of behaviour patterns cannot be distinguished puristically from every other; there are exceptions and differences of kind and degree. Parabiosis ranges from the sharing of common trails to sharing common nests, and from effectively tolerating another species in general, to toleration only of the single colony of that species that shares the same nest. Furthermore, there is evidence for the partitioning of functions and unequal sharing of work between the two species in the nest. Early reports that parabiotic ant colonies forage and feed together peacefully also have been qualified by observations that revealed ants of one species in such an association aggressively displacing members of the other species from artificially provided food, while also profiting by following their recruitment trails to new food sources.\n\nIn practice parabiosis hardly could be a purely neutral interaction. There can be consequent benefits from shared nest defence and maintenance even when there is neither direct cooperation nor inimical interaction between the two associated populations in a nest.\n\n", "id": "26305461", "title": "Parabiosis"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=41439747", "text": "Pseudohypoxia\n\nPseudohypoxia refers to increased cytosolic ratio of free NAD to NADH in cells.\nResearch has shown that declining levels of NAD+ during aging cause pseudohypoxia, and that raising nuclear NAD+ in old mice reverses pseudohypoxia and metabolic dysfunction, thus reversing the aging process. It is expected that human NAD trials will begin in 2014.\n\n", "id": "41439747", "title": "Pseudohypoxia"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=41163070", "text": "Fast-scan cyclic voltammetry\n\nFast-scan cyclic voltammetry (FSCV) is cyclic voltammetry with a very high scan rate (up to ). Application of high scan rate allows rapid acquisition of a voltammogram within several milliseconds and ensures high temporal resolution of this electroanalytical technique. An acquisition rate of 10 Hz is routinely employed.\n\nFSCV in combination with carbon-fiber microelectrodes became a very popular method for detection of neurotransmitters, hormones and metabolites in biological systems. Initially, FSCV was successfully used for detection of electrochemically active biogenic amines release in chromaffin cells (adrenaline and noradrenaline), brain slices (5-HT, dopamine, norepinephrine) and in vivo in anesthetized or awake and behaving animals (dopamine). Further refinements of the method have enabled detection of 5-HT, norepinephrine, adenosine, oxygen, pH changes in vivo in rats and mice as well as measurement of dopamine and serotonin concentration in fruit flies.\n\nIn fast-scan cyclic voltammetry (FSCV), a small carbon fiber electrode (micrometer scale) is inserted into living cells, tissue, or extracellular space. The electrode is then used to quickly raise and lower the voltage in a triangular wave fashion. When the voltage is in the correct range (typically ±1 Volt) the compound of interest will be repeatedly oxidized and reduced. This will result in a movement of electrons in solution that will ultimately create a small alternating current (nano amps scale). By subtracting the background current created by the probe from the resulting current, it is possible to generate a voltage vs. current plot that is unique to each compound. Since the time scale of the voltage oscillations is known, this can then be used to calculate a plot of the current in solution as a function of time. The relative concentrations of the compound may be calculated as long as the number of electrons transferred in each oxidation and reduction reaction is known.\n\nAdvantages such as chemical specificity, high resolution, and noninvasive probes make FSCV a powerful technique for detecting changing chemical concentrations in vivo. The chemical specificity of FSCV is derived from reduction potentials. Every compound has a unique reduction potential, and so the alternating voltage can be set to select for a particular compound. As a result, FSCV can be used to measure a variety of electrically active biological compounds such as catacholamines, indolamines, and neurotransmitters. Concentration changes regarding ascorbic acid, oxygen, nitric oxide, and hydrogen ions (pH) can also be detected. It can even be used to measure multiple compounds at the same time, as long as one has a positive and the other has a negative redox potential. High resolution is achieved by changing the voltage at very high speeds, referred to as a fast scan rate. Scan rates for FSCV are on the sub-second scale, oxidizing and reducing compounds in microseconds. Another advantage of FSCV is its ability to be used in vivo. Typical electrodes consist of small carbon fiber needles that are micrometers in diameter and able to be noninvasively inserted into live tissues. The size of the electrode also permits it to probe very specific brain regions. Thus, FSCV has proved to be effective in measuring chemical fluctuations of living organisms and has been used in conjunction with several behavioral studies.\n\nAcceptable voltage and current ranges are common limitations of FSCV. To start, the electric potential must stay within the voltage range of the electrolysis of water (Eo = ± 1.23). Additionally, the resulting current must remain low in order to avoid cell lysis as well as cell depolarization. Fast scan cyclic voltammetry is also limited in that it only makes differential measurements; the currents it measures are only relative to the background, so they cannot be used to quantify resting concentrations. This is partially due to the fact that the basal current levels are largely effected by factors such as pH, so over longer periods of time these values tend to drift. The age of the electrode is also important, and probes tend to be less accurate the longer they are used.\n\nThis technique is also limited to quantifying the concentrations of electrically active compounds, and can only be used with select molecules in biological systems. In spite of this, there have been methods developed to measure levels of non-electric enzymes that have an electroactive substrate. However, in this scenario, the electrode probes are also a limiting factor in the data resolution. When measuring an electroactive substrate, the probe is often coated with its corresponding enzyme. In order to avoid the enzyme interacting with different substrates, the electrode is also coated with a polymer that acts as a selective filter against particular types of ions. However, when this polymer is added it lowers the speed at which the voltage scans can be made and effectively lowers the data resolution.\n\nFSCV is used to monitor changes in concentration of dopamine in mammalian brain in real time with sensitivity down to 1 nM. Using an acquisition rate of 10 Hz is fast enough to sample dynamics of neurotransmitter release and clearance. Pharmacological action of dopaminergic drugs such as D1 and D2 receptors agonists and antagonist (raclopride, haloperidol), dopamine transporter blockers (cocaine, nomifensine, GBR 12909) could be evaluated with FSCV. The fast acquisition rate also allows the study of dopamine dynamics during behavior.\n\nThe effects of psychostimulants (cocaine, amphetamine and methamphetamine), opioids (morphine and heroin), cannabinoids, alcohol and nicotine on dopaminergic neurotransmission and development of drug addiction was studied with FSCV.\n\nDopamine is a primary neurotransmitter mediating learning, goal-directing behavior and decision making. Monitoring of dopamine concentration in vivo in behaving animals with FSCV reveals dopamine coding of the brain's decision making process.\n\nFSCV is used to study dynamics of exocytosis of noradrenaline and adrenaline from chromaffin cells; release of serotonin from mast cells; release of 5-HT in brain slices; release of 5-HT in brain of anesthetized rodents and fruite flies; release of norepinephrine in brain of anesthetized and freely moving rodents.\n\n", "id": "41163070", "title": "Fast-scan cyclic voltammetry"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20433613", "text": "Universality–diversity paradigm\n\nThe universality–diversity paradigm is the analysis of biological materials based on the universality and diversity of its fundamental structural elements and functional mechanisms. The analysis of biological systems based on this classification has been a cornerstone of modern biology.\n\nFor example, proteins constitute the elementary building blocks of a vast variety of biological materials such as cells, spider silk or bone, where they create extremely robust, multi-functional materials by self-organization of structures over many length- and time scales, from nano to macro. Some of the structural features are commonly found in many different tissues, that is, they are highly conserved. Examples of such universal building blocks include alpha-helices, beta-sheets or tropocollagen molecules. In contrast, other features are highly specific to tissue types, such as particular\nfilament assemblies, beta-sheet nanocrystals in spider silk or tendon fascicles. This coexistence of universality and diversity—referred to as the universality–diversity paradigm (UDP)—is an overarching feature in biological materials and a crucial component of materiomics. It might provide guidelines for bioinspired and biomimetic material development, where this concept is translated into the use of inorganic or hybrid organic-inorganic building blocks.\n\n\n", "id": "20433613", "title": "Universality–diversity paradigm"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9127632", "text": "Biology\n\nBiology is the natural science that involves the study of life and living organisms, including their physical structure, chemical composition, function, development and evolution. Modern biology is a vast field, composed of many branches. Despite the broad scope and the complexity of the science, there are certain unifying concepts that consolidate it into a single, coherent field. Biology recognizes the cell as the basic unit of life, genes as the basic unit of heredity, and evolution as the engine that propels the creation of new species. Living organisms are open systems that survive by transforming energy and decreasing their local entropy to maintain a stable and vital condition defined as homeostasis. See glossary of biology. \n\nSub-disciplines of biology are defined by the scale at which life is studied, the kinds of organisms studied, and the methods used to study them: biochemistry examines the rudimentary chemistry of life; molecular biology studies the complex interactions among biological molecules; cellular biology examines the basic building-block of all life, the cell; physiology examines the physical and chemical functions of tissues, organs, and organ systems; ecology examines how organisms interact in their environment; and evolutionary biology examines the processes that produced the diversity of life. \n\nThe term \"biology\" is derived from the Greek word , \"bios\", \"life\" and the suffix , \"-logia\", \"study of.\" The Latin-language form of the term first appeared in 1736 when Swedish scientist Carl Linnaeus (Carl von Linné) used \"biologi\" in his \"Bibliotheca botanica\". It was used again in 1766 in a work entitled \"Philosophiae naturalis sive physicae: tomus III, continens geologian, biologian, phytologian generalis\", by Michael Christoph Hanov, a disciple of Christian Wolff. The first German use, \"Biologie\", was in a 1771 translation of Linnaeus' work. In 1797, Theodor Georg August Roose used the term in the preface of a book, \"Grundzüge der Lehre van der Lebenskraft\". Karl Friedrich Burdach used the term in 1800 in a more restricted sense of the study of human beings from a morphological, physiological and psychological perspective (\"Propädeutik zum Studien der gesammten Heilkunst\"). The term came into its modern usage with the six-volume treatise \"Biologie, oder Philosophie der lebenden Natur\" (1802–22) by Gottfried Reinhold Treviranus, who announced:\n\nAlthough modern biology is a relatively recent development, sciences related to and included within it have been studied since ancient times. Natural philosophy was studied as early as the ancient civilizations of Mesopotamia, Egypt, the Indian subcontinent, and China. However, the origins of modern biology and its approach to the study of nature are most often traced back to ancient Greece. While the formal study of medicine dates back to Hippocrates (ca. 460 BC – ca. 370 BC), it was Aristotle (384 BC – 322 BC) who contributed most extensively to the development of biology. Especially important are his \"History of Animals\" and other works where he showed naturalist leanings, and later more empirical works that focused on biological causation and the diversity of life. Aristotle's successor at the Lyceum, Theophrastus, wrote a series of books on botany that survived as the most important contribution of antiquity to the plant sciences, even into the Middle Ages.\n\nScholars of the medieval Islamic world who wrote on biology included al-Jahiz (781–869), Al-Dīnawarī (828–896), who wrote on botany, and Rhazes (865–925) who wrote on anatomy and physiology. Medicine was especially well studied by Islamic scholars working in Greek philosopher traditions, while natural history drew heavily on Aristotelian thought, especially in upholding a fixed hierarchy of life.\n\nBiology began to quickly develop and grow with Anton van Leeuwenhoek's dramatic improvement of the microscope. It was then that scholars discovered spermatozoa, bacteria, infusoria and the diversity of microscopic life. Investigations by Jan Swammerdam led to new interest in entomology and helped to develop the basic techniques of microscopic dissection and staining.\n\nAdvances in microscopy also had a profound impact on biological thinking. In the early 19th century, a number of biologists pointed to the central importance of the cell. Then, in 1838, Schleiden and Schwann began promoting the now universal ideas that (1) the basic unit of organisms is the cell and (2) that individual cells have all the characteristics of life, although they opposed the idea that (3) all cells come from the division of other cells. Thanks to the work of Robert Remak and Rudolf Virchow, however, by the 1860s most biologists accepted all three tenets of what came to be known as cell theory.\n\nMeanwhile, taxonomy and classification became the focus of natural historians. Carl Linnaeus published a basic taxonomy for the natural world in 1735 (variations of which have been in use ever since), and in the 1750s introduced scientific names for all his species. Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon, treated species as artificial categories and living forms as malleable—even suggesting the possibility of common descent. Though he was opposed to evolution, Buffon is a key figure in the history of evolutionary thought; his work influenced the evolutionary theories of both Lamarck and Darwin.\n\nSerious evolutionary thinking originated with the works of Jean-Baptiste Lamarck, who was the first to present a coherent theory of evolution. He posited that evolution was the result of environmental stress on properties of animals, meaning that the more frequently and rigorously an organ was used, the more complex and efficient it would become, thus adapting the animal to its environment. Lamarck believed that these acquired traits could then be passed on to the animal's offspring, who would further develop and perfect them. However, it was the British naturalist Charles Darwin, combining the biogeographical approach of Humboldt, the uniformitarian geology of Lyell, Malthus's writings on population growth, and his own morphological expertise and extensive natural observations, who forged a more successful evolutionary theory based on natural selection; similar reasoning and evidence led Alfred Russel Wallace to independently reach the same conclusions. Although it was the subject of controversy (which continues to this day), Darwin's theory quickly spread through the scientific community and soon became a central axiom of the rapidly developing science of biology.\n\nThe discovery of the physical representation of heredity came along with evolutionary principles and population genetics. In the 1940s and early 1950s, experiments pointed to DNA as the component of chromosomes that held the trait-carrying units that had become known as genes. A focus on new kinds of model organisms such as viruses and bacteria, along with the discovery of the double helical structure of DNA in 1953, marked the transition to the era of molecular genetics. From the 1950s to present times, biology has been vastly extended in the molecular domain. The genetic code was cracked by Har Gobind Khorana, Robert W. Holley and Marshall Warren Nirenberg after DNA was understood to contain codons. Finally, the Human Genome Project was launched in 1990 with the goal of mapping the general human genome. This project was essentially completed in 2003, with further analysis still being published. The Human Genome Project was the first step in a globalized effort to incorporate accumulated knowledge of biology into a functional, molecular definition of the human body and the bodies of other organisms.\n\nCell theory states that the cell is the fundamental unit of life, that all living things are composed of one or more cells, and that all cells arise from other cells through cell division. In multicellular organisms, every cell in the organism's body derives ultimately from a single cell in a fertilized egg. The cell is also considered to be the basic unit in many pathological processes. In addition, the phenomenon of energy flow occurs in cells in processes that are part of the function known as metabolism. Finally, cells contain hereditary information (DNA), which is passed from cell to cell during cell division. Research into the origin of life, abiogenesis, amounts to an attempt to discover the origin of the first cells.\n\nA central organizing concept in biology is that life changes and develops through evolution, and that all life-forms known have a common origin. The theory of evolution postulates that all organisms on the Earth, both living and extinct, have descended from a common ancestor or an ancestral gene pool. This universal common ancestor of all organisms is believed to have appeared about 3.5 billion years ago. Biologists regard the ubiquity of the genetic code as definitive evidence in favor of the theory of universal common descent for all bacteria, archaea, and eukaryotes (see: origin of life).\n\nThe term \"evolution\" was introduced into the scientific lexicon by Jean-Baptiste de Lamarck in 1809, and fifty years later Charles Darwin posited a scientific model of natural selection as evolution's driving force. (Alfred Russel Wallace is recognized as the co-discoverer of this concept as he helped research and experiment with the concept of evolution.) Evolution is now used to explain the great variations of life found on Earth.\n\nDarwin theorized that species flourish or die when subjected to the processes of natural selection or selective breeding. Genetic drift was embraced as an additional mechanism of evolutionary development in the modern synthesis of the theory.\n\nThe evolutionary history of the species—which describes the characteristics of the various species from which it descended—together with its genealogical relationship to every other species is known as its phylogeny. Widely varied approaches to biology generate information about phylogeny. These include the comparisons of DNA sequences, a product of molecular biology (more particularly genomics), and comparisons of fossils or other records of ancient organisms, a product of paleontology. Biologists organize and analyze evolutionary relationships through various methods, including phylogenetics, phenetics, and cladistics. (For a summary of major events in the evolution of life as currently understood by biologists, see evolutionary timeline.) \n\nEvolution is relevant to the understanding of the natural history of life forms and to the understanding of the organization of current life forms. But, those organizations can only be understood in the light of how they came to be by way of the process of evolution. Consequently, evolution is central to all fields of biology. \n\nGenes are the primary units of inheritance in all organisms. A gene is a unit of heredity and corresponds to a region of DNA that influences the form or function of an organism in specific ways. All organisms, from bacteria to animals, share the same basic machinery that copies and translates DNA into proteins. Cells transcribe a DNA gene into an RNA version of the gene, and a ribosome then translates the RNA into a sequence of amino acids known as a protein. The translation code from RNA codon to amino acid is the same for most organisms. For example, a sequence of DNA that codes for insulin in humans also codes for insulin when inserted into other organisms, such as plants.\n\nDNA is found as linear chromosomes in eukaryotes, and circular chromosomes in prokaryotes. A chromosome is an organized structure consisting of DNA and histones. The set of chromosomes in a cell and any other hereditary information found in the mitochondria, chloroplasts, or other locations is collectively known as a cell's genome. In eukaryotes, genomic DNA is localized in the cell nucleus, or with small amounts in mitochondria and chloroplasts. In prokaryotes, the DNA is held within an irregularly shaped body in the cytoplasm called the nucleoid. The genetic information in a genome is held within genes, and the complete assemblage of this information in an organism is called its genotype.\n\nHomeostasis is the ability of an open system to regulate its internal environment to maintain stable conditions by means of multiple dynamic equilibrium adjustments that are controlled by interrelated regulation mechanisms. All living organisms, whether unicellular or multicellular, exhibit homeostasis.\n\nTo maintain dynamic equilibrium and effectively carry out certain functions, a system must detect and respond to perturbations. After the detection of a perturbation, a biological system normally responds through negative feedback that stabilize conditions by reducing or increasing the activity of an organ or system. One example is the release of glucagon when sugar levels are too low.\n\nThe survival of a living organism depends on the continuous input of energy. Chemical reactions that are responsible for its structure and function are tuned to extract energy from substances that act as its food and transform them to help form new cells and sustain them. In this process, molecules of chemical substances that constitute food play two roles; first, they contain energy that can be transformed and reused in that organism's biological, chemical reactions; second, food can be transformed into new molecular structures (biomolecules) that are of use to that organism.\n\nThe organisms responsible for the introduction of energy into an ecosystem are known as producers or autotrophs. Nearly all such organisms originally draw their energy from the sun. Plants and other phototrophs use solar energy via a process known as photosynthesis to convert raw materials into organic molecules, such as ATP, whose bonds can be broken to release energy. A few ecosystems, however, depend entirely on energy extracted by chemotrophs from methane, sulfides, or other non-luminal energy sources.\n\nSome of the energy thus captured produces biomass and energy that is available for growth and development of other life forms. The majority of the rest of this biomass and energy are lost as waste molecules and heat. The most important processes for converting the energy trapped in chemical substances into energy useful to sustain life are metabolism and cellular respiration.\n\nMolecular biology is the study of biology at the molecular level. This field overlaps with other areas of biology, particularly those of genetics and biochemistry. Molecular biology is a study of the interactions of the various systems within a cell, including the interrelationships of DNA, RNA, and protein synthesis and how those interactions are regulated.\n\nThe next larger scale, cell biology, studies the structural and physiological properties of cells, including their internal behavior, interactions with other cells, and with their environment. This is done on both the microscopic and molecular levels, for unicellular organisms such as bacteria, as well as the specialized cells of multicellular organisms such as humans. Understanding the structure and function of cells is fundamental to all of the biological sciences. The similarities and differences between cell types are particularly relevant to molecular biology.\n\nAnatomy is a treatment of the macroscopic forms of such structures organs and organ systems.\n\nGenetics is the science of genes, heredity, and the variation of organisms. Genes encode the information needed by cells for the synthesis of proteins, which in turn play a central role in influencing the final phenotype of the organism. Genetics provides research tools used in the investigation of the function of a particular gene, or the analysis of genetic interactions. Within organisms, genetic information is physically represented as chromosomes, within which it is represented by a particular sequence of amino acids in particular DNA molecules. \n\nDevelopmental biology studies the process by which organisms grow and develop. Developmental biology, originated from embryology, studies the genetic control of cell growth, cellular differentiation, and \"cellular morphogenesis,\" which is the process that progressively gives rise to tissues, organs, and anatomy.\nModel organisms for developmental biology include the round worm \"Caenorhabditis elegans,\" the fruit fly \"Drosophila melanogaster,\" the zebrafish \"Danio rerio,\" the mouse \"Mus musculus\", and the weed \"Arabidopsis thaliana\". (A model organism is a species that is extensively studied to understand particular biological phenomena, with the expectation that discoveries made in that organism provide insight into the workings of other organisms.)\n\nPhysiology is the study of the mechanical, physical, and biochemical processes of living organisms function as a whole. The theme of \"structure to function\" is central to biology. Physiological studies have traditionally been divided into plant physiology and animal physiology, but some principles of physiology are universal, no matter what particular organism is being studied. For example, what is learned about the physiology of yeast cells can also apply to human cells. The field of animal physiology extends the tools and methods of human physiology to non-human species. Plant physiology borrows techniques from both research fields.\n\nPhysiology is the study the interaction of how, for example, the nervous, immune, endocrine, respiratory, and circulatory systems, function and interact. The study of these systems is shared with such medically oriented disciplines as neurology and immunology.\n\nEvolutionary research is concerned with the origin and descent of species, and their change over time. It employs scientists from many taxonomically oriented disciplines, for example, those with special training in particular organisms such as mammalogy, ornithology, botany, or herpetology, but are of use in answering more general questions about evolution.\n\nEvolutionary biology is partly based on paleontology, which uses the fossil record to answer questions about the mode and tempo of evolution, and partly on the developments in areas such as population genetics. In the 1980s, developmental biology re-entered evolutionary biology after its initial exclusion from the modern synthesis through the study of evolutionary developmental biology. Phylogenetics, systematics, and taxonomy are related fields often considered part of evolutionary biology.\n\nMultiple speciation events create a tree structured system of relationships between species. The role of systematics is to study these relationships and thus the differences and similarities between species and groups of species.\nHowever, systematics was an active field of research long before evolutionary thinking was common.\n\nTraditionally, living things have been divided into five kingdoms: Monera; Protista; Fungi; Plantae; Animalia. However, many scientists now consider this five-kingdom system outdated. Modern alternative classification systems generally begin with the three-domain system: Archaea (originally Archaebacteria); Bacteria (originally Eubacteria) and Eukaryota (including protists, fungi, plants, and animals) These domains reflect whether the cells have nuclei or not, as well as differences in the chemical composition of key biomolecules such as ribosomes.\n\nFurther, each kingdom is broken down recursively until each species is separately classified. The order is:\nDomain; Kingdom; Phylum; Class; Order; Family; Genus; Species.\n\nOutside of these categories, there are obligate intracellular parasites that are \"on the edge of life\" in terms of metabolic activity, meaning that many scientists do not actually classify such structures as alive, due to their lack of at least one or more of the fundamental functions or characteristics that define life. They are classified as viruses, viroids, prions, or satellites.\n\nThe scientific name of an organism is generated from its genus and species. For example, humans are listed as \"Homo sapiens\". \"Homo\" is the genus, and \"sapiens\" the species. When writing the scientific name of an organism, it is proper to capitalize the first letter in the genus and put all of the species in lowercase. Additionally, the entire term may be italicized or underlined.\n\nThe dominant classification system is called the Linnaean taxonomy. It includes ranks and binomial nomenclature. How organisms are named is governed by international agreements such as the International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants (ICN), the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature (ICZN), and the International Code of Nomenclature of Bacteria (ICNB). The classification of viruses, viroids, prions, and all other sub-viral agents that demonstrate biological characteristics is conducted by the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV) and is known as the International Code of Viral Classification and Nomenclature (ICVCN). However, several other viral classification systems do exist.\n\nA merging draft, BioCode, was published in 1997 in an attempt to standardize nomenclature in these three areas, but has yet to be formally adopted. The BioCode draft has received little attention since 1997; its originally planned implementation date of January 1, 2000, has passed unnoticed. A revised BioCode that, instead of replacing the existing codes, would provide a unified context for them, was proposed in 2011. However, the International Botanical Congress of 2011 declined to consider the BioCode proposal. The ICVCN remains outside the BioCode, which does not include viral classification.\n\nEcology is the study of the distribution and abundance of living organisms, the interaction between them and their environment. An organism shares an environment that includes other organisms and biotic factors as well as local abiotic factors (non-living) such as climate and ecology. One reason that biological systems can be difficult to study is that so many different interactions with other organisms and the environment are possible, even on small scales. A microscopic bacterium responding to a local sugar gradient is responding to its environment as much as a lion searching for food in the African savanna. For any species, behaviors can be co-operative, competitive, parasitic, or symbiotic. Matters become more complex when two or more species interact in an ecosystem.\n\nEcological systems are studied at several different levels, from the scale of the ecology of individual organisms, to those of populations, to the ecosystems and finally the biosphere. The term population biology is often used interchangeably with population ecology, although \"population biology\" is more frequently used in the case of diseases, viruses, and microbes, while the term population ecology is more commonly applied to the study of plants and animals. Ecology draws on many subdisciplines.\n\nEthology is the study of animal behavior (particularly that of social animals such as primates and canids), and is sometimes considered a branch of zoology. Ethologists have been particularly concerned with the evolution of behavior and the understanding of behavior in terms of the theory of natural selection. In one sense, the first modern ethologist was Charles Darwin, whose book, \"The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals,\" influenced many ethologists to come.\n\nBiogeography studies the spatial distribution of organisms on the Earth, focusing on such topics as plate tectonics, climate change, dispersal and migration, and cladistics.\n\nDespite the profound advances made over recent decades in our understanding of life's fundamental processes, some basic problems have remained unresolved. One of the major unresolved problems in biology is the primary adaptive function of sex, and particularly its key processes in eukaryotes of meiosis and homologous recombination. One view is that sex evolved primarily as an adaptation that promoted increased genetic diversity (see references e.g.). An alternative view is that sex is an adaptation for promoting accurate DNA repair in germ-line DNA, and that increased genetic diversity is primarily a byproduct that may be useful in the long run. (See also Evolution of sexual reproduction).\n\nAnother basic unresolved problem in biology is the biologic basis of aging. At present, there is no consensus view on the underlying cause of aging. Various competing theories are outlined in Ageing Theories.\n\nThese are the main branches of biology:\nFor a more detailed list, see outline of biology.\n\n\n\n", "id": "9127632", "title": "Biology"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44057611", "text": "Tokogeny\n\nTokogeny or tocogeny is the biological relationship between parent and offspring, or more generally between ancestors and descendants. In contradistinction to phylogeny it applies to individual organisms as opposed to species.\n\nIn the tokogentic system shared characteristics are called \"traits\".\n", "id": "44057611", "title": "Tokogeny"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44055899", "text": "Triploid block\n\nTriploid block is a phenomenon describing the formation of nonviable progeny after hybridization of flowering plants that differ in ploidy. The barrier is established in the endosperm, a nutritive tissue supporting embryo growth. This phenomenon usually happens when autopolyploidy occurs in diploid plants. Triploid blocks lead to reproductive isolation. The triploid block effects have been explained as possibly due to genomic imprinting in the endosperm.\n", "id": "44055899", "title": "Triploid block"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44961465", "text": "Pinch-induced behavioral inhibition\n\nPinch-induced behavioral inhibition (PIBI) or clipnosis is a partially inert state which results from a gentle squeeze of the skin behind the neck. It is mostly observed among Felidae and allows the mother cat to easily carry her kitten with her jaws. It can be used to effectively restrain most cats in a domestic or veterinary context.\n", "id": "44961465", "title": "Pinch-induced behavioral inhibition"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=319610", "text": "Biological life cycle\n\nIn biology, a biological life cycle (or just life cycle when the biological context is clear) is a series of changes in form that an organism undergoes, returning to the starting state. \"The concept is closely related to those of the life history, development and ontogeny, but differs from them in stressing renewal.\" Transitions of form may involve growth, asexual reproduction, or sexual reproduction.\n\nIn some organisms, different \"generations\" of the species succeed each other during the life cycle. For plants and many algae, there are two multicellular stages, and the life cycle is referred to as alternation of generations. The term life history is often used, particularly for organisms such as the red algae which have three multicellular stages (or more), rather than two.\n\nLife cycles that include sexual reproduction involve alternating haploid (\"n\") and diploid (2\"n\") stages, i.e., a change of ploidy is involved. To return from a diploid stage to a haploid stage, meiosis must occur. In regard to changes of ploidy, there are 3 types of cycles:\n\nThe cycles differ in when mitosis (growth) occurs. Zygotic meiosis and gametic meiosis have one mitotic stage: mitosis occurs during the \"n\" phase in zygotic meiosis and during the 2\"n\" phase in gametic meiosis. Therefore, zygotic and gametic meiosis are collectively termed haplobiontic (single mitotic phase, not to be confused with haplontic). Sporic meiosis, on the other hand, has mitosis in two stages, both the diploid and haploid stages, termed diplobiontic (not to be confused with diplontic).\n\nThe study of reproduction and development in organisms was carried out by many botanists and zoologists.\n\nWilhelm Hofmeister demonstrated that alternation of generations is a feature that unites plants, and published this result in 1851 (see plant sexuality).\n\nSome terms (haplobiont and diplobiont) used for the description of life cycles were proposed initially for algae by Nils Svedelius, and then became used for other organisms. Other terms (autogamy and gamontogamy) used in protist life cycles were introduced by Karl Gottlieb Grell. The description of the complex life cycles of various organisms contributed to the disproof of the ideas of spontaneous generation in the 1840s and 1850s.\n\nA zygotic meiosis is a meiosis of a zygote immediately after karyogamy, which is the fusion of two cell nuclei. This way, the organism ends its diploid phase and produces several haploid cells. These cells divide mitotically to form either larger, multicellular individuals, or more haploid cells. Two opposite types of gametes (e.g., male and female) from these individuals or cells fuse to become a zygote.\n\nIn the whole cycle, zygotes are the only diploid cell; mitosis occurs only in the haploid phase.\n\nThe individuals or cells as a result of mitosis are haplonts, hence this life cycle is also called haplontic life cycle. Haplonts are:\n\n\nIn gametic meiosis, instead of immediately dividing \"meiotically\" to produce haploid cells, the zygote divides \"mitotically\" to produce a multicellular diploid individual or a group of more unicellular diploid cells. Cells from the diploid individuals then undergo meiosis to produce haploid cells or gametes. Haploid cells may divide again (by mitosis) to form more haploid cells, as in many yeasts, but the haploid phase is not the predominant life cycle phase. In most diplonts, mitosis occurs only in the diploid phase, i.e. gametes usually form quickly and fuse to produce diploid zygotes.\n\nIn the whole cycle, gametes are usually the only haploid cells, and mitosis usually occurs only in the diploid phase.\n\nThe diploid multicellular individual is a diplont, hence a gametic meiosis is also called a diplontic life cycle. Diplonts are:\n\n\nIn sporic meiosis (also commonly known as intermediary meiosis), the zygote divides mitotically to produce a multicellular diploid sporophyte. The sporophyte creates spores via meiosis which \"also\" then divide mitotically producing haploid individuals called gametophytes. The gametophytes produce gametes via mitosis. In some plants the gametophyte is not only small-sized but also short-lived; in other plants and many algae, the gametophyte is the \"dominant\" stage of the life cycle.\n\nHaplodiplonts are:\n\n\nSome animals have a sex-determination system called haplodiploid, but this is not related to the haplodiplontic life cycle.\n\nSome red algae (such as \"Bonnemaisonia\" and \"Lemanea\") and green algae (such as \"Prasiola\") have vegetative meiosis, also called somatic meiosis, which is a rare phenomenon. Vegetative meiosis can occur in haplodiplontic and also in diplontic life cycles. The gametophytes remain attached to and part of the sporophyte. Vegetative (non-reproductive) diploid cells undergo meiosis, generating vegetative haploid cells. These undergo many mitosis, and produces gametes.\n\nA different phenomenon, called vegetative diploidization, a type of apomixis, occurs in some brown algae (e.g., \"Elachista stellaris\"). Cells in a haploid part of the plant spontaneously duplicate their chromosomes to produce diploid tissue.\n\nThe primitive type of life cycle probably had haploid individuals with asexual reproduction. Bacteria and archaea exhibit a life cycle like this, and some eukaryotes apparently do too (e.g., Cryptophyta, Choanoflagellata, many Euglenozoa, many Amoebozoa, some red algae, some green algae, the imperfect fungi, some rotifers and many other groups, not necessarily haploid). However, these eukaryotes probably are not primitively asexual, but have lost their sexual reproduction, or it just was not observed yet. Many eukaryotes (including animals and plants) exhibit asexual reproduction, which may be facultative or obligate in the life cycle, with sexual reproduction occurring more or less frequently.\n\n\n", "id": "319610", "title": "Biological life cycle"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1989020", "text": "Indeterminate growth\n\nIn biology and botany, indeterminate growth is growth that is not terminated in contrast to determinate growth that stops once a genetically pre-determined structure has completely formed. Thus, a plant that grows and produces flowers and fruit until killed by frost or some other external factor is called indeterminate. For example, the term is applied to tomato varieties that grow in a rather gangly fashion, producing fruit throughout the growing season, and in contrast to a determinate tomato plant, which grows in a more bushy shape and is most productive for a single, larger harvest, then either tapers off with minimal new growth/fruit, or dies.\n\nIn reference to an inflorescence (a shoot specialised for bearing flowers, and bearing no leaves other than bracts), an indeterminate type (such as a raceme) is one in which the first flowers to develop and open are from the buds at the base, followed progressively by buds nearer to the growing tip. The growth of the shoot is not impeded by the opening of the early flowers or development of fruits and its appearance is of growing, producing, and maturing flowers and fruit indefinitely. In practice the continued growth of the terminal end necessarily peters out sooner or later, though without producing any definite terminal flower, and in some species it may stop growing before any of the buds have opened. \n\nNot all plants produce indeterminate inflorescences however; some produce a definite terminal flower that terminates the development of new buds towards the tip of that inflorescence. In most species that produce a \"'determinate\" inflorescence in this way, all of the flower buds are formed before the first ones begin to open, and all open more or less at the same time. In some species with determinate inflorescences however, the terminal flower blooms first, which stops the elongation of the main axis, but side buds develop lower down. One type of example is Dianthus another type is exemplified by Allium and yet others by Daucus.\n\nIn zoology, indeterminate growth refers to the condition where animals grow rapidly when young, and continue to grow after reaching adulthood although at a slower pace. It is common in fish, amphibians, reptiles, and many molluscs. The term also refers to the pattern of hair growth sometimes seen in humans and a few domestic breeds, where hair continues to grow in length until it is cut.\n\nSome mushrooms – notably \"Cantharellus californicus\" – also exhibit indeterminate growth.\n\n", "id": "1989020", "title": "Indeterminate growth"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46439815", "text": "Feminist biology\n\nFeminist biology is an approach to biology that is concerned with the influence of gender values, the removal of gender bias, and the understanding of the overall role of social values in biological research and practices. Feminist Biology, was founded by, among others, Dr. Ruth Bleier of the University of Wisconsin-Madison (who authored the 1984 work “Science and Gender: A Critique of Biology and Its Theories on Women” and inspired the university’s endowed fellowship for feminist biology), it aims to enhance biology by incorporating feminist critique in matters varying from the mechanisms of cell biology and sex selection to the assessment of the meaning of words such as “gender” and “sex.”\nOverall, the field is broadly defined and pertains itself to philosophies behind both biological and feminist practice. These considerations make feminist biology debatable and conflictive with itself, particularly when concerning matters of biological determinism, whereby descriptive sex terms of male and female are intrinsically confining, or extreme post-modernism, whereby the body is viewed more as a social construct. Despite opinions ranging from determinist to postmodernist, however, biologists, feminists, and feminist biologists of varying labels alike have made claims to the utility of applying feminist ideology to biological practice and procedure.\n\nDonna J. Haraway, a biologist and primatologist hailing from the University of California, put forth male bias criticisms in 1989 concerning the study of human evolution and culture via primatology by denoting a prominent lack of focus in female primates. Haraway contributed to a large discovery of behaviors in primate groups regarding mate selection, and female-female interactions derived from observing female primates, citing feminist influences as she studied the female primates in their own merit.\n\nSimilarly, feminist cell biologists of The Biology and Gender Study Group have criticized androcentrism in the study of behavior between sexes and “come to look at feminist critique as [they] would any experimental control.” They cite a general trend of “active” biological description associated with the sperm gamete and “passive” description to the ovum, comparing such description to an archetypal hero facing many challenges before it finding its static, female home. The group criticized the diction employed by biological readings and textbooks, stating that the more active and risk-associated traits of the ovum (such as its own survival from the whittling of 2 million oocytes) are dismissed for the sake of a patterned narrative.\n\nAnne Fausto-Sterling, a professor of Biology and Gender Studies at Brown University, assesses the complexity of defining sex through a dichotomous lens in a variety of her works such as Sexing the Body: Gender Politics and the Construction of Sexuality as well as in an article piece she wrote titled “The Five Sexes: Why Male and Female Are Not Enough.” She addresses the existence of intersex individuals and the lack of acknowledgment of their state of being in the context of a dichotomously defined world of sexes – even, if not especially, by medical professionals and surgeons who understand intersex anatomy to a point to where they can surgically alter it to one of the sexes. She states: “Ironically, a more sophisticated knowledge of the complexity of sexual systems has led to the repression of such intricacy.” Fausto-Sterling continues by advocating the reevaluation of what is considered urgent medical intervention in light of the influence she believes social stigma has had on standard medical procedure – which in turn could help open up the possible directions that science could take.\n\nVarying motivations are at work for those who advocate feminist biology. Many individuals are motivated by the need to discern a more objective, scientific truth from culturally influenced practices (such as with Fausto-Sterling’s five sexes), while others are concerned dispelling stigmatic prejudices that influential figures have accepted as scientifically – and objectively – true. While extreme cases such as Edward Clarke’s controversial, 19th century assessment that women’s education diverts a harmful amount of energy away from the uterus are no longer as prevalent, more contemporary examples such as The Biology and Gender Study’s issue with gamete depiction exemplify this.\n\nIndividuals such as Carla Fehr offer constructive criticism for the future of feminist philosophy in the field of biology; Fehr proposes feminist biologists to consider novel questions pertaining to subjects such as the research of genomics in relation to gender. More skeptical criticism exists in sources such as the American Enterprise Institute, who called to question the legitimacy of feminist biology altogether in its reception to the University of Wisconsin’s endowed fellowship.\n", "id": "46439815", "title": "Feminist biology"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46984631", "text": "Heteromorphosis\n\nHeteromorphosis ( – other; morphe – form) – atypical reparative (traumatic) regeneration than new organ or a tissue is different from the old one or (embryonic) development anomalies, including an abnormal location, or an abnormal shape. It should not be confused with homeosis, which means big change in tissue structure of an organ.\n\nJacques Loeb offered this term in 1892, then he was in experiments of distortion of polarity of hydroids.\nMany organisms from protozoans to the chordate may have heteromorphosis examples, but it is easier to find in lower forms of animals:\n\n", "id": "46984631", "title": "Heteromorphosis"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46840954", "text": "FMRFamide in Biomphalaria glabrata\n\nBiomphalaria glabrata is a species of a freshwater snail, an aquatic gastropod mollusk in the family Planorbidae, the rams horn snails. \"B. glabrata\" is best known for its role as the intermediate host for the human-infecting trematode parasite \"Schistosoma mansoni\".\n\nThis freshwater snail species is used as a model organism, in other words, a non-human species which is extensively studied to understand a biological phenomenon, with the expectation that discoveries made in the model will provide insight into the workings of other organisms. Model organisms are in vivo models and are widely used to research human disease when human experimentation would be unfeasible or unethical.\n\nThis snail has been studied in relation to human pathology and the epidemiology of schistosomiasis. \"S. masoni\" is known to change its host’s (\"B. glabrata\"'s) behavior via the upregulation/downregulation of neuropeptides such as schistosomin and NPY, and some studies have reported that FMRFamide is aminergic, and may be implicated in the secretion of molecules to respond to infection with parasites.\n\nThe ganglionic central nervous system (CNS) of \"B. glabrata\" consists of paired cerebral, pedal, pleural, parietal, and buccal ganglia, and one unpaired visceral ganglion. FMRFamide is concentrated in the concentrated in the cerebral and visceral ganglia, although evidence from current research suggests that FMRFamide moves downward of the head-foot region of the snail as embryonic development proceeds.\n\nThe exact role of FMRFamide during early development of the embryonic central nervous system is not well studied. Detection of this neuropeptide is important because its expression lays down the foundation of the CNS in the early stages of development in invertebrates. In recent years, neuromodulatory actions of FMRFamide in invertebrates have become more apparent. This is in part due to the extensive studies done on the Planorbidae and Lymnaeidae families of pond snails.\n\nFMRFamide expression in \"B. glabrata\" can be detected as early 72 hours, post-cleavage. Studies have shown its expression pattern in the posterior of the ganglionic nervous system, as the first FMRFamide immunoreactive cell appears at 25-28% of development and is located at the extreme posterior of the embryo. The cell sends a single process on each side and each process follows the body curvature.\n\nAs these processes elongate, two lateral FMRFamide-expressing cells are apparent on either side of the body wall. Some studies have suggested that FMRFamide these structures may innervate muscles that originate in trochopore larvae and expand during development. This neuromodulator helps to regulate cardiac activity. Several FMRFamid related peptides are known, regulating various cellular functions and possessing pharmacological actions, such as anti-opiate effects. FMRFamide may also play a role in osmoregulation and developmental patterning. This neuropeoptide has multiple functions and controls many processes that allow the embryo to mature into an adult snail.\n\nFMRFamide patterning over the course of embryonic life has been recorded through immunofluorescence. Embryos at 0 to 144 hours (6 days) post cleavage were extracted from the egg mass and fixed in 4% PFA for 2 hrs at room temperature. Embryos older than 4 days were pre-treated with 0.5% ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) solution in PBS for 5 minutes to improve primary antibody penetration, and then fixed in 4% PFA for 2 hours at room temperature. Embryos were then washed overnight in 4% Triton X-100 in PBS and incubated in blocking solution, 1% normal goal serum in PBS, overnight at 4 °C.\n\nAfter blocking overnight, embryos were treated with a primary antibody solution at 1:2000 (in NGS/PBS). Secondary antibody tagged with fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated anti-rabbit IgG (polyclonal) was incubated at 1:20, overnight at 4 °C. Embryos were then mounted on a slide and viewed with fluorescent microscopy.\n\n", "id": "46840954", "title": "FMRFamide in Biomphalaria glabrata"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27919", "text": "Sociobiology\n\nSociobiology is a field of biology that aims to examine and explain social behavior in terms of evolution. It draws from disciplines including ethology, anthropology, evolution, zoology, archaeology, and population genetics. Within the study of human societies, sociobiology is closely allied to Darwinian anthropology, human behavioral ecology and evolutionary psychology.\n\nSociobiology investigates social behaviors such as mating patterns, territorial fights, pack hunting, and the hive society of social insects. It argues that just as selection pressure led to animals evolving useful ways of interacting with the natural environment, so also it led to the genetic evolution of advantageous social behavior.\n\nWhile the term \"sociobiology\" originated at least as early as the 1940s, the concept did not gain major recognition until the publication of E. O. Wilson's book \"\" in 1975. The new field quickly became the subject of controversy. Critics, led by Richard Lewontin and Stephen Jay Gould, argued that genes played a role in human behavior, but that traits such as aggressiveness could be explained by social environment rather than by biology. Sociobiologists responded by pointing to the complex relationship between nature and nurture.\n\nE. O. Wilson defined sociobiology as \"the extension of population biology and evolutionary theory to social organization\".\n\nSociobiology is based on the premise that some behaviors (social and individual) are at least partly inherited and can be affected by natural selection. It begins with the idea that behaviors have evolved over time, similar to the way that physical traits are thought to have evolved. It predicts that animals will act in ways that have proven to be evolutionarily successful over time. This can, among other things, result in the formation of complex social processes conducive to evolutionary fitness.\n\nThe discipline seeks to explain behavior as a product of natural selection. Behavior is therefore seen as an effort to preserve one's genes in the population. Inherent in sociobiological reasoning is the idea that certain genes or gene combinations that influence particular behavioral traits can be inherited from generation to generation\n\nFor example, newly dominant male lions often kill cubs in the pride that they did not sire. This behavior is adaptive because killing the cubs eliminates competition for their own offspring and causes the nursing females to come into heat faster, thus allowing more of his genes to enter into the population. Sociobiologists would view this instinctual cub-killing behavior as being inherited through the genes of successfully reproducing male lions, whereas non-killing behavior may have died out as those lions were less successful in reproducing.\n\nThe ethologist John Paul Scott coined the word \"sociobiology\" at a 1948 conference on genetics and social behaviour, and it became widely used after it was popularized by Edward O. Wilson in his 1975 book, \"Sociobiology: The New Synthesis\". However, the influence of evolution on behavior has been of interest to biologists and philosophers since soon after the discovery of evolution itself. Peter Kropotkin's \"\", written in the early 1890s, is a popular example. Antecedents of modern sociobiological thinking can be traced to the 1960s and the work of such biologists as Richard D. Alexander, Robert Trivers and William D. Hamilton.\nThe idea of the inheritance of behaviour arose from J. B. S. Haldane's idea about how \"altruistic behaviour\" (see Altruism) could be passed from generation to generation.\nWilson's book pioneered and popularized the attempt to explain the evolutionary mechanics behind social behaviors such as altruism, aggression, and nurturance, primarily in ants (Wilson's own research specialty) and other Hymenoptera, but also in other animals. The final chapter of the book is devoted to sociobiological explanations of human behavior, and Wilson later wrote a Pulitzer Prize winning book, \"On Human Nature\", that addressed human behavior specifically.\n\nEdward H. Hagen writes in \"The Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology\" that sociobiology is, despite the public controversy regarding the applications to humans, \"one of the scientific triumphs of the twentieth century.\" \"Sociobiology is now part of the core research and curriculum of virtually all biology departments, and it is a foundation of the work of almost all field biologists\" Sociobiological research on nonhuman organisms has increased dramatically and continuously in the world's top scientific journals such as \"Nature\" and \"Science\". The more general term behavioral ecology is commonly substituted for the term sociobiology in order to avoid the public controversy.\n\nSociobiologists believe that human behavior, as well as nonhuman animal behavior, can be partly explained as the outcome of natural selection. They contend that in order to fully understand behavior, it must be analyzed in terms of evolutionary considerations.\n\nNatural selection is fundamental to evolutionary theory. Variants of hereditary traits which increase an organism's ability to survive and reproduce will be more greatly represented in subsequent generations, i.e., they will be \"selected for\". Thus, inherited behavioral mechanisms that allowed an organism a greater chance of surviving and/or reproducing in the past are more likely to survive in present organisms. That inherited adaptive behaviors are present in nonhuman animal species has been multiply demonstrated by biologists, and it has become a foundation of evolutionary biology. However, there is continued resistance by some researchers over the application of evolutionary models to humans, particularly from within the social sciences, where culture has long been assumed to be the predominant driver of behavior.\n\nSociobiology is based upon two fundamental premises:\n\nSociobiology uses Nikolaas Tinbergen's four categories of questions and explanations of animal behavior. Two categories are at the species level; two, at the individual level. The species-level categories (often called \"ultimate explanations\") are\nThe individual-level categories (often called \"proximate explanations\") are\n\nSociobiologists are interested in how behavior can be explained logically as a result of selective pressures in the history of a species. Thus, they are often interested in instinctive, or intuitive behavior, and in explaining the similarities, rather than the differences, between cultures. For example, mothers within many species of mammals – including humans – are very protective of their offspring. Sociobiologists reason that this protective behavior likely evolved over time because it helped the offspring of the individuals which had the characteristic to survive. This parental protection would increase in frequency in the population. The social behavior is believed to have evolved in a fashion similar to other types of nonbehavioral adaptations, such as a coat of fur, or the sense of smell.\n\nIndividual genetic advantage fails to explain certain social behaviors as a result of gene-centred selection. E.O. Wilson argued that evolution may also act upon groups. The mechanisms responsible for group selection employ paradigms and population statistics borrowed from evolutionary game theory. Altruism is defined as \"a concern for the welfare of others\". If altruism is genetically determined, then altruistic individuals must reproduce their own altruistic genetic traits for altruism to survive, but when altruists lavish their resources on non-altruists at the expense of their own kind, the altruists tend to die out and the others tend to increase. An extreme example is a soldier losing his life trying to help a fellow soldier. This example raises the question of how altruistic genes can be passed on if this soldier dies without having any children.\n\nWithin sociobiology, a social behavior is first explained as a sociobiological hypothesis by finding an evolutionarily stable strategy that matches the observed behavior. Stability of a strategy can be difficult to prove, but usually, it will predict gene frequencies. The hypothesis can be supported by establishing a correlation between the gene frequencies predicted by the strategy, and those expressed in a population.\n\nAltruism between social insects and littermates has been explained in such a way. Altruistic behavior, behavior that increases the reproductive fitness of others at the apparent expense of the altruist, in some animals has been correlated to the degree of genome shared between altruistic individuals. A quantitative description of infanticide by male harem-mating animals when the alpha male is displaced as well as rodent female infanticide and fetal resorption are active areas of study. In general, females with more bearing opportunities may value offspring less, and may also arrange bearing opportunities to maximize the food and protection from mates.\n\nAn important concept in sociobiology is that temperament traits exist in an ecological balance. Just as an expansion of a sheep population might encourage the expansion of a wolf population, an expansion of altruistic traits within a gene pool may also encourage increasing numbers of individuals with dependent traits.\n\nStudies of human behavior genetics have generally found behavioral traits such as creativity, extroversion, aggressiveness, and IQ have high heritability. The researchers who carry out those studies are careful to point out that heritability does not constrain the influence that environmental or cultural factors may have on those traits.\n\nCriminality is actively under study, but extremely controversial. There are arguments that in some environments criminal behavior might be adaptive. The novelist Elias Canetti also has noted applications of sociobiological theory to cultural practices such as slavery and autocracy.\n\nGenetic mouse mutants illustrate the power that genes exert on behaviour. For example, the transcription factor FEV (aka Pet1), through its role in maintaining the serotonergic system in the brain, is required for normal aggressive and anxiety-like behavior. Thus, when FEV is genetically deleted from the mouse genome, male mice will instantly attack other males, whereas their wild-type counterparts take significantly longer to initiate violent behaviour. In addition, FEV has been shown to be required for correct maternal behaviour in mice, such that offspring of mothers without the FEV factor do not survive unless cross-fostered to other wild-type female mice.\n\nA genetic basis for instinctive behavioural traits among non-human species, such as in the above example, is commonly accepted among many biologists; however, attempting to use a genetic basis to explain complex behaviours in human societies has remained extremely controversial.\n\nSteven Pinker argues that critics have been overly swayed by politics and a fear of biological determinism, accusing among others Stephen Jay Gould and Richard Lewontin of being \"radical scientists\", whose stance on human nature is influenced by politics rather than science, while Lewontin, Steven Rose and Leon Kamin who drew a distinction between the politics and history of an idea and its scientific validity argue that sociobiology fails on scientific grounds. Gould grouped sociobiology with eugenics, criticizing both in his book \"The Mismeasure of Man\".\n\nNoam Chomsky has expressed views on sociobiology on several occasions. During a 1976 meeting of the Sociobiology Study Group, as reported by Ullica Segerstråle, Chomsky argued for the importance of a sociobiologically informed notion of human nature. Chomsky argued that human beings are biological organisms and ought to be studied as such, with his criticism of the \"blank slate\" doctrine in the social sciences (which would inspire a great deal of Steven Pinker's and others' work in evolutionary psychology), in his 1975 \"Reflections on Language\". Chomsky further hinted at the possible reconciliation of his anarchist political views and sociobiology in a discussion of Peter Kropotkin's \"\", which focused more on altruism than aggression, suggesting that anarchist societies were feasible because of an innate human tendency to cooperate.\n\nWilson has claimed that he had never meant to imply what \"ought\" to be, only what \"is\" the case. However, some critics have argued that the language of sociobiology readily slips from \"is\" to \"ought\", an instance of the naturalistic fallacy. Pinker has argued that opposition to stances considered anti-social, such as ethnic nepotism, is based on moral assumptions, meaning that such opposition is not falsifiable by scientific advances. The history of this debate, and others related to it, are covered in detail by , , and .\n\n\n\n\n", "id": "27919", "title": "Sociobiology"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11461412", "text": "I-cell\n\nI-cells also called inclusion cells are abnormal fibroblasts having a large number of dark inclusions in the cytoplasm of the cell (mainly in the central area). The inclusions are of various fats, proteins, carbohydrates, pigments and other insolubles.They are seen in mucolipidosis II.\n", "id": "11461412", "title": "I-cell"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48483838", "text": "Encapsulin nanocompartment\n\nEncapsulin nanocompartments, or encapsulin protein cages, are spherical bacterial organelles roughly 25-30 nm in diameter that are involved in various aspects of metabolism, in particular protecting bacteria from oxidative stress. Encapsulin nanocompartments are structurally similar to the HK97 bacteriophage and their function depends on the proteins loaded into the nanocompartment. The sphere is formed from 60 (for a 25 nm sphere) or 180 (for a 30 nm sphere) copies of a single protomer, termed encapsulin. Their structure has been studied in great detail using X-ray crystallography and cryo-electron microscopy.\n\nA number of different types of proteins have been identified as being loaded into encapsulin nanocompartments. Peroxidases or proteins similar to ferritins are the two most common types of cargo proteins. While most encapsulin nanocompartments contain only one type of cargo protein, in some species two or three types of cargo proteins are loaded. \n\nEncapsulins purified from \"Rhodococcus jostii\" can be assembled and disassembled with changes in pH. In the assembled state, the compartment enhances the activity of its cargo, a peroxidase enzyme.\n\nRecently, encapsulin nanocompartments have begun to receive considerable interest from bioengineers because of their potential to allow the targeted delivery of drugs, proteins, and mRNAs to specific cells of interest.\n", "id": "48483838", "title": "Encapsulin nanocompartment"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19364849", "text": "Encapsulin\n\nThe encapsulins are a family of bacterial proteins that serve as the main structural components of encapsulin nanocompartments. There are several different encapsulin proteins, including EncA, which forms the shell, and EncB, EncC, and EncD, which form the core.\n", "id": "19364849", "title": "Encapsulin"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48264022", "text": "Pursuit predation\n\nPursuit predation is a form of predation in which predators give chase to fleeing prey. The chase can be initiated either by the predator or by the prey, should the prey be alerted to a predator's presence and attempt to flee before the predator gives chase. The chase ends with either the predator capturing and consuming the prey, effectively diminishing the prey's fitness, or with the prey escaping the predator's hunt, thus maintaining the prey's overall fitness, but leaving both prey and predator with metabolic losses. Pursuit predation is typically observed in carnivorous species within the kingdom Animalia, with some iconic examples being cheetahs, lions, and wolves.\n\nPursuit predation is an alternate predation strategy to ambush predation. While pursuit predators use a detection and pursuit phase in order to obtain prey, ambush predators use stealth to capture prey. Strength and speed are important to pursuit predators, whereas ambush predators ignore these in favor of surprise from a typically concealed location. While the two patterns of predation are not mutually exclusive, morphological differences in body plan can create a bias in an organism towards each type of predation.\n\nThere is still uncertainty as to whether predators behave with a general tactic or strategy while preying. However, among pursuit predators, there are several common behaviors. Often, predators will scout potential prey, assessing prey quantity and density prior to engaging in a pursuit. Certain predators choose to pursue prey primarily in a group of conspecifics; such animals are known as pack hunters or group pursuers. Other species choose to hunt alone. These two behaviors are typically due to differences in hunting success, where some groups are very successful in groups and others are more successful alone. Pursuit predators may also choose to either exhaust their metabolic resources rapidly or pace themselves during a chase. This choice can be influenced by prey species, seasonal settings, or temporal settings. Predators that rapidly exhaust their metabolic resources during a chase tend to first stalk their prey, slowly approaching their prey to decrease chase distance and time. When the predator is at a closer distance (one that would lead to easier prey capture), it finally gives chase. Pacing pursuit is more commonly seen in group pursuit, as individual animals do not need to exert as much energy to capture prey. However, this type of pursuit requires group coordination, which may have varying degrees of success. Since groups can engage in longer chases, they often focus on separating a weaker or slower prey item during pursuit. Morphologically speaking, while ambush predation requires stealth, pursuit predation requires speed; pursuit predators are proportionally long-limbed and equipped with cursorial adaptations. Current theories suggest that this proportionally long-limbed approach to body plan was an evolutionary countermeasure to prey adaptation.\n\nGroup pursuers hunt with a collection of conspecifics. Group pursuit is usually seen in species of relatively high sociality; in vertebrates, individuals often seem to have defined roles in pursuit.\n\nAfrican wild dog (\"Lycaon pictus\") packs have been known to split into several smaller groups while in pursuit; one group initiates the chase, while the other travels ahead of the prey's escape path. The group of chase initiators coordinate their chase to lead the prey towards the location of the second group, where the prey's escape path will be effectively cut off. Bottlenose dolphins (\"Tursiops\") have been shown exhibiting similar behaviors of pursuit role specialization. One group within the dolphin pod, known as the drivers, give chase to the fish - forcing the fish into a tight circle formation, while the other group of the pod, the barriers, approach the fish from the opposite direction. This two-pronged attack leaves the fish with only the option of jumping out of the water to escape the dolphins. However, the fish are completely vulnerable in the air; it is at this point when the dolphins leap out and catch the fish. In lion (\"Panthera leo\") pack hunting, each member of the hunting group is assigned a position, from left wing to right wing, in order to better obtain prey. Such specializations in roles within the group are thought to increase sophistication in technique; lion wing members are faster, and will drive prey toward the center where the larger, stronger, killing members of the pride will take down the prey. Many observations of group pursuers note an optimal hunting size in which certain currencies (mass of prey killed or number of prey killed) are maximized with respect to costs (kilometers covered or injuries sustained). Groups size is often dependent on aspects of the environment: number of prey, prey density, number of competitors, seasonal changes, etc.\n\nWhile birds are generally believed to be individual hunters, there are a few examples of birds that cooperate during pursuits. Harris's hawks (\"Parabuteo unicinctus\") have two cooperative strategies for hunting. One strategy involves a group of hawks surrounding prey hidden under some form of cover, while another hawk attempts to penetrate the prey's cover. The penetration attempt flushes the prey out from its cover where it is swiftly killed by one of the surrounding hawks. The second strategy is less commonly used. It involves a \"relay attack\" in which a group of hawks, led by a \"lead\" hawk, engage in a long chase for prey. The \"lead\" hawk will dive in order to kill the prey. If the dive is unsuccessful, the role of the \"lead\" shifts to another hawk who will then dive in another attempt to kill the prey. During one observed relay attack, 20 dives and hence 20 lead switches were exhibited.\n\n\nAs in vertebrates, there are many species of invertebrates which actively pursue prey in groups and exhibit task specialization, but while the vertebrates change their behavior based on their role in hunting, invertebrate task delegation is usually based on actual morphological differences. The vast majority of eusocial insects have castes within a population which tend to differ in size and have specialized structures for different tasks. This differentiation is taken to the extreme in the groups isoptera and hymenoptera, or termites and ants, bees, and wasps respectively.\n\nTermites are detritivores and therefore do not exhibit pursuit behaviors, however ants and wasps can be highly predatory and are known to pursue prey in groups. For example, termite-hunting ants of the genus \"Pachycondyla\", also known as Matabele ants, form raiding parties consisting of ants of different castes, such as soldier ants and worker ants. Soldier ants are much larger than worker ants, with more powerful mandibles and more robust exoskeletons, and so they make up the front lines of raiding parties and are responsible for killing prey. Workers usually butcher and carry off the killed prey, while supporting the soldiers. The raiding parties are highly mobile and move aggressively into the colonies of termites, often breaking through their outer defenses and entering their mounds. The ants do not completely empty the mound of termites, instead they only take a few, allowing the termites to recover their numbers so that the ants have a steady stream of prey.\n\nAsian giant hornets, \"Vespa mandarinia\", form similar raiding parties to hunt their prey, which usually consists of honeybees. The giant hornets group together and as a team can decimate an entire honeybee colony, especially those of non-native European honeybees. Alone, the hornets are subject to attack by the smaller bees, who swarm the hornet and vibrate their abdomens to generate heat, collectively cooking the hornet until it dies. By hunting in groups, the hornets avoid this problem.\n\nWhile most big cat species are individual, ambush predators, Cheetahs (\"Acinonyx jubatus\") are pursuit predators. Widely known as the fastest terrestrial animal, with speeds reaching 61–64 miles per hour, cheetahs take advantage of their speed during chases. However, their speed and acceleration also have disadvantages, as both can only be sustained for short periods of time. Studies show that cheetahs can maintain maximum speed for a distance of approximately 500 yards. Due to these limitations, cheetahs are often observed running at moderate speeds during chases. There are claims that the key to cheetahs' pursuit success may not be just their speed. Cheetahs are extremely agile, able to maneuver and change directions at very high speeds in very short amounts of time. This extensive maneuverability can make up for unsustainable high speed pursuit, as it allows cheetahs to quickly close the distance between prey without decreasing their speed when prey change direction.\n\nThe Painted redstart (\"Myioborus pictus\") is one of the most well documented flush pursuers. When flies, prey for redstarts, are alerted of the presence of predators, they respond by fleeing. Redstarts take advantage of this anti-predator response by spreading and orienting their easily noticeable wings and tails, alerting the flies, but only when they are in a position where the flies' escape path intersects with the redstart's central field of vision. When prey's path are in this field of vision, the redstart's prey capture rate is at it maximum. Once the flies begin to flee, the redstart begins to chase. It has been proposed that redstarts exploit two aspects of the visual sensitivity of their prey: sensitivity to the location of the stimulus in the prey's visual field and sensitivity to the direction of stimulus environment. The effectiveness of this pursuit can also be explained by \"rare enemy effect\", an evolutionary consequence of multi-species predator-prey interactions.\n\nDragonflies are skilled aerial pursuers; they have a 97% success rate for prey capture. This success rate is a consequence of the \"decision\" of which prey to pursue based on initial conditions. Observations of several species of perching dragonflies show more pursuit initiations at larger starting distances for larger size prey species than for much smaller prey. Further evidence points to a potential bias towards larger prey, due to more substantial metabolic rewards. This bias is in spite of the fact that larger prey are typically faster and choosing them results in less successful pursuits. Dragonflies high success rate for prey capture may also be due to their \"interception\" foraging method. Unlike tracking foraging methods, in which predators focus on closing in on the current position of their prey, the interception method has the dragonfly seeking the position directly ahead of their prey as a way of surmising a prey's future location. Perching dragonflies (Libellulidae family), the largest family of dragonflies, have been observed \"staking out\" high density prey spots prior to pursuit. There are no noticeable distinctions in prey capture efficiency between male and female dragonflies. Further, percher dragonflies are bound by their visual range. They are more likely to engage in pursuit when prey come within a subtended angle of around 1-2 degrees. Angles greater than this are outside of a dragonflies visual range.\n\nCurrent theory on the evolution of pursuit predation suggests that the behavior is an evolutionary countermeasure to prey adaptation. Prey animals vary in their likelihood to avoid predation, and it is predation failure that drives evolution of both prey and predator. Predation failure rates vary wildly across the animal kingdom; raptorial birds can fail anywhere from 20% to 80% of the time in predation, while predatory mammals usually fail more than half the time. Prey adaptation drives these low rates in three phases: the detection phase, the pursuit phase, and the resistance phase. The pursuit phase drove the evolution of distinct behaviors for pursuit predation. \nAs selective pressure on prey is higher than on predators adaptation usually occurs in prey long before the reciprocal adaptations in predators. Evidence in the fossil record supports this, with no evidence of modern pursuit predators until the late Tertiary period. Certain adaptations, like long limbs in ungulates, that were thought to be adaptive for speed against predatory behavior have been found to predate predatory animals by over 20 million years. Because of this, modern pursuit predation is an adaptation that may have evolved separately and much later as a need for more energy in colder and more arid climates. Longer limbs in predators, the key morphological adaptation required for lengthy pursuit of prey, is tied in the fossil record to the late Tertiary. It is now believed that modern pursuit predators like the wolf and lion evolved this behavior around this time period as a response to ungulates increasing feeding range. As ungulate prey moved into a wider feeding range to discover food in response to changing climate, predators evolved the longer limbs and behavior necessary to pursue prey across larger ranges. In this respect, pursuit predation is not co-evolutionary with prey adaptation, but a direct response to prey. Prey's adaptation to climate is the key formative reason for evolving the behavior and morphological necessities of pursuit predation.\n\nIn addition to serving as a countermeasure to prey adaptation, pursuit predation has evolved in some species as an alternative, facultative mechanism for foraging. For example, polar bears typically act as specialized predators of seal pups and operate in a manner closely predicted by the optimal foraging theory. However, they have been seen to occasionally employ more energy-inefficient pursuit predation tactics on flightless geese. This alternative predatory strategy may serve as a back-up resource when optimal foraging is circumstantially impossible, or may even be a function of filling dietary needs.\n\nPursuit predation revolves around a distinct movement interaction between predator and prey; as prey move to find new foraging areas, predators should move with them. Predators congregate in areas of high prey density, and prey should therefore avoid these areas. However, dilution factor may be a reason to stay in areas of high density due to a decreased risk of predation. Given the movements of predators over ranges in pursuit predation, though, dilution factor seems a less important cause for predation avoidance. Because of these interactions, spatial patterns of predators and prey are important in preserving population size. Attempts by prey to avoid predation and find food are coupled with predator attempts to hunt and compete with other predators. These interactions act to preserve populations. Models of spatial patterns and synchrony of predator-prey relationships can be used as support for the evolution of pursuit predation as one mechanism to preserve these population mechanics. By pursuing prey over long distances, predators actually improve longterm survival of both their own population and prey population through population synchrony. Pursuit predation acts to even out population fluctuations by moving predatory animals from areas of high predator density to low predator density, and low prey density to high prey density. This keeps migratory populations in synchrony, which increases metapopulation persistence. Pursuit predation’s effect on population persistence is more marked over larger travel ranges. Predator and prey levels are usually more synchronous in predation over larger ranges, as population densities have more ability to even out. Pursuit predation can then be supported as an adaptive mechanism for not just individual feeding success but also metapopulation persistence.\n\nJust as the evolutionary arms race has led to the development of pursuit behavior of predators, so too has it led to the anti-predator adaptations of prey. Alarm displays such as eastern swamphen's tail flicking, white-tailed deer's tail flagging, and Thomson's gazelles' stotting have been observed deterring pursuit. These tactic are believed to signal that a predator's presence is known and, therefore, pursuit will be much more difficult. These displays are more frequent when predators are at an intermediate distance away. Alarm displays are used more often when prey believe predators are more prone to change their decision to pursue. For instance, cheetahs, common predators of Thomson's gazelles, are less likely to change their choice to pursue. As such, gazelles stott less when cheetahs are present than when other predators are present. In addition to behavioral adaptations, there are also morphological anti-predator adaptations to pursuit predators. For example, many birds have evolved rump feathers that fall off with much less force than the feathers of their other body parts. This allows for easier escape from predator birds, as avian predators often approach prey from their rump.\n\nIn many species that fall prey to pursuit predation, gregariousness on a massive scale has evolved as a protective behavior and can be conspecific or heterospecific within a given group. This is primarily due to the Confusion Effect, which states that if prey animals congregate in large groups, predators will have more difficulty identifying and tracking specific individuals. This effect has greater influence when individuals are visually similar and less distinguishable. In groups where individuals are visually similar, there is a negative correlation between group size and predator success rates. This may mean that the overall number of attacks decreases with larger group size or that the number of attacks per kill increases with larger group size. This is especially true in open habitats, such as grasslands or open ocean ecosystems, where view of the prey group is unobstructed, in contrast to a forest or reef. Prey species in these open environments tend to be especially gregarious, with notable examples being starlings and sardines. When individuals of the herd are visually dissimilar, however, the success rate of predators increases dramatically. In one study, wildebeest on the African Savannah were selected at random and had their horns painted white. This introduced a distinction, or oddity, into the population, and researchers found that wildebeest who had white horns were preyed upon at substantially higher rates. By standing out, individuals are not as easily lost in the crowd, and so predators are able to track and pursue them with higher fidelity. This has been proposed as the reason why many schooling fish show little to no sexual dimorphism, and why many species in heterospecific schools bear a close resemblance to other species in their school.\n", "id": "48264022", "title": "Pursuit predation"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48444540", "text": "Biconcave disc\n\nA biconcave disc is a geometric shape resembling an oblate spheroid with two concavities on the top and on the bottom.\n\nErythrocytes are in the shape of a biconcave disc. It has been suggested that this shape is optimal for surface area to volume ratio, but this hypothesis has not been widely accepted. In addition, it has been suggested that the biconcave shape is needed to optimise the blood's flow properties.\n", "id": "48444540", "title": "Biconcave disc"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48756720", "text": "Tachyaerobic\n\nTachyaerobic is a term used in biology to describe the muscles of large animals and birds that are able to maintain high levels or physical activity because their hearts make up at least 0.5-0.6 percent of their body mass and maintain high blood pressures. A reptile displaying equal size to a tachyaerobic mammal does not have the same capabilities. Tachyaerobic animal's hearts beat more quickly, produce more oxygen, and distribute blood at a quicker rate than reptiles.\n\nThe use of tachyaerobic muscles is important to animals such as giraffes that need blood circulated through a large body size quickly.\n\n", "id": "48756720", "title": "Tachyaerobic"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27492898", "text": "Betaine transporter\n\nProteins of the Betaine/Carnitine/Choline Transporter (BCCT) family (TC# 2.A.15) are found in Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria and archaea. The BCCT family is a member a large group of secondary transporters, the APC superfamily. Their common functional feature is that they all transport molecules with a quaternary ammonium group [R-N (CH)]. The BCCT family proteins vary in length between 481 and 706 amino acyl residues and possess 12 putative transmembrane α-helical spanners (TMSs). The x-ray structures reveal two 5 TMS repeats with the total number of TMSs being 10. These porters catalyze bidirectional uniport or are energized by pmf-driven or smf-driven proton or sodium ion symport, respectively, or else by substrate:substrate antiport. Some of these permeases exhibit osmosensory and osmoregulatory properties inherent to their polypeptide chains.\n\nSchulze et al. (2010) reported the structures of the sodium-independent carnitine/butyrobetaine antiporter CaiT from \"Proteus mirabilis\" (PmCaiT) at 2.3 Å (, ) and from \"E. coli\" (EcCaiT) at 3.5 Å resolution (, ).\n\nMost members of the BCCT family are Na- or H-dependent, whereas EcCaiT is a Na- and H-independent substrate:product antiporter. The three-dimensional architecture of CaiT resembles that of the Na-dependent transporters LeuT and BetP, but in CaiT, a methionine sulphur takes the place of the Na to coordinate the substrate in the central transport site, accounting for Na independence. Both CaiT structures (, ) show the fully open, inward-facing conformation, and thus complete the set of functional states that describe the alternating access mechanism. EcCaiT (, ) contains two bound butyrobetaine substrate molecules, one in the central transport site, the other in an extracellular binding pocket. In the structure of PmCaiT, a tryptophan side chain occupies the transport site, and access to the extracellular site is blocked. Binding of both substrates to CaiT reconstituted into proteoliposomes is cooperative, with Hill coefficients of up to 1.7, indicating that the extracellular site is regulatory. Schulze et al. (2010) proposed a mechanism whereby the occupied regulatory site increases the binding affinity of the transport site and initiates substrate translocation. Glycine betaine transporters have been found to contain a conserved region with four tryptophans in their central region.\n\nMost secondary-active transporters transport their substrates using an electrochemical ion gradient, but the carnitine transporter (CaiT) is an ion-independent, L-carnitine/gamma-butyrobetaine antiporter. Crystal structures of CaiT from \"E. coli\" and \"Proteus mirabilis\" revealed the inverted five-transmembrane-helix repeat similar to that in the amino acid/Na symporter, LeuT. Kalayil et al. (2013) showed that mutations of arginine 262 (R262) made CaiT Na-dependent with increased transport activity in the presence of a membrane potential, in agreement with substrate/Na cotransport. R262 also plays a role in substrate binding by stabilizing the partly unwound TM1' helix.\n\nModeling CaiT from \"P. mirabilis\" in the outward-open and closed states on the corresponding structures of the related symporter BetP revealed alternating orientations of the buried R262 side chain, which mimic sodium binding and unbinding in the Na-coupled substrate symporters. A similar mechanism may be operative in other Na/H-independent transporters, in which a positively charged amino acid replaces the cotransported cation. The oscillation of the R262 side chain in CaiT indicates how a positive charge triggers the change between outward-open and inward-open conformations.\n\nThe generalized transport reactions catalyzed by members of the BCCT family are:\n\nThe mammalian betaine transporter (BGT1; SLC6A12) is predominantly expressed in the liver (hepatocytes). It is also expressed in the kidney where it is regulated by NFAT5 during a response to osmotic stress. Further, BGT1 is also present in the leptomeninges surrounding the brain. Deletion of the BGT1 gene in mice did not appear to have any impact on the tendency to develop epilepsy. This is to be expected considering that BGT1 is expressed at far lower levels than GAT1 and also has lower affinity for GABA. This implies that it is not likely to contribute significantly to the inactivation of the inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA.\n\n", "id": "27492898", "title": "Betaine transporter"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49159269", "text": "APC Family\n\nThe Amino Acid-Polyamine-Organocation (APC) Family (TC# 2.A.3) of transport proteins includes members that function as solute:cation symporters and solute:solute antiporters. They occur in bacteria, archaea, fungi, unicellular eukaryotic protists, slime molds, plants and animals. They vary in length, being as small as 350 residues and as large as 850 residues. The smaller proteins are generally of prokaryotic origin while the larger ones are of eukaryotic origin. Most of them possess twelve transmembrane α-helical spanners but have a re-entrant loop involving TMSs 2 and 3. The APC Superfamily was established to encompass a wider range of homologues. \n\nMembers of one subfamily within the APC family (SGP; TC# 2.A.3.9) are amino acid receptors rather than transporters and are truncated at their C-termini, relative to the transporters, having 10 TMSs.\n\nThe eukaryotic members of another subfamily (CAT; TC# 2.A.3.3) and the members of a prokaryotic subfamily (AGT; TC #2.A.3.11) have 14 TMSs.\n\nThe larger eukaryotic and archaeal proteins possess N- and C-terminal hydrophilic extensions. Some animal proteins, for example, those in the LAT subfamily (TC# 2.A.3.8) including ASUR4 (gbY12716) and SPRM1 (gbL25068) associate with a type 1 transmembrane glycoprotein that is essential for insertion or activity of the permease and forms a disulfide bridge with it. These glycoproteins include the CD98 heavy chain protein of \"Mus musculus (gbU25708)\" and the orthologous 4F2 cell surface antigen heavy chain of \"Homo sapiens (spP08195).\" The latter protein is required for the activity of the cystine/glutamate antiporter (2.A.3.8.5), which maintains cellular redox balance and cysteine/glutathione levels. They are members of the rBAT family of mammalian proteins (TC #8.A.9).\n\nTwo APC family members, LAT1 and LAT2 (TC #2.A.3.8.7), transport a neurotoxicant, the methylmercury-L-cysteine complex, by molecular mimicry.\n\nHip1 of \"S. cerevisiae\" (TC #2.A.3.1.5) has been implicated in heavy metal transport.\n\nSubfamilies of the APC family, and the proteins in these families, can be found in the Transporter Classification Database:\n\n\nBased on 3-D structures of APC superfamily members, Rudnick (2011) has proposed the pathway for transport and suggested a \"\"rocking bundle\"\" mechanism.\n\nTransport reactions generally catalyzed by APC Superfamily members include:\n\n", "id": "49159269", "title": "APC Family"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49158055", "text": "Sulfide intrusion\n\nIn biology, sulfide intrusion refers to an excess of sulfide molecules in the soil interfering with plant growth, often seagrass.\n\nSeagrass bed sediment (soil) is typically anoxic, containing a reduced form of sulfur: hydrogen sulfide (H2S). H2S is a phytotoxin that results from anaerobic digestion, the decomposition of organic matter in the absence of oxygen. However, seagrass can persist in this environment because of physiological adaptations, as well as functional adaptations of other organisms in the ecosystem. For example, bivalves (clams) in the family Lucinidae host symbiotic bacteria that oxidize sulfides. Lucinid bivalves' gills house the bacteria, and the siphon supplies the bacteria and surrounding pore water with oxygenated water from above the sediment. Bacterial oxidation of the sulfides results in sulfates, reducing toxicity.\n\n", "id": "49158055", "title": "Sulfide intrusion"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49033936", "text": "TSUP family\n\nThe 4-Toluene Sulfonate Uptake Permease (TSUP) family (TC# 2.A.102) is also referred to as the TauE/SafE/YfcA/DUF81 Family. Although its members have not been rigorously characterized, evidence is available that at least some members function in the transport of sulfur containing organic compounds. These include 4-toluene sulfonate which may be transported by the TsaS of \"Cupriavidus necator\" (TC# 2.A.102.1.1), sulfolactate which may be exported by the TauE protein of \"Cupriavidus necator\" (TC# 2.A.102.2.1) and sulfoacetate which may be exported by the SafE1 protein of \"Neptuniibacter caesariensis\" (TC# 2.A.102.2.2). Another member of the TSUP family, TsaS of \"Comamonas testosteroni\", has been reported to function in the uptake of 4-toluene sulfonate. None of these functional assignments can be considered to be certain.\n\n", "id": "49033936", "title": "TSUP family"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49162176", "text": "AGCS family\n\nMembers of the Alanine or Glycine:Cation Symporter (AGCS) Family (TC# 2.A.25) transport alanine and/or glycine in symport with Na and or H.\n\nKnown proteins in the AGCS family are between 445 and 550 amino acyl residues in length and possess 8 to 12 putative transmembrane α-helical spanners. Members may possess 11 transmembrane segments (TMSs), as seems to be true for DagA (TC# 2.A.25.1.1) and AgcS (TC# 2.A.25.1.3), although Acp (TC# 2.A.25.1.2) has only 8 TMSs, perhaps the result of truncation. As of early 2016, there does not appear to be any 3D crystal structure data available for these proteins. Members of the AGCS family have been found in bacteria and archaea, such as extremophile halotolerant cyanobacterium \"Aphanothece halophytica,\" and thermophilic bacteria, \"Bacillus\" \"PS3\". As of 2015, only three members of the family have been functionally characterized. These proteins show limited sequence similarity in the APC family (TC# 2.A.3). As of early 2016, there do not appear to be any crystal structures available for members of the AGCS family.\n\nThe generalized transport reaction catalyzed by the AGCS family is:\n\nalanine or glycine (out) + Na or H (out) → alanine or glycine (in) + Na or H (in).\n\nThere are currently 10 proteins belonging to the AGCS family. These proteins and their descriptions can be found in the Transporter Classification Database.\n", "id": "49162176", "title": "AGCS family"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35039952", "text": "Nucleobase cation symporter-2\n\nThe Nucleobase:Cation Symporter-2 (NCS2) Family, also called the Nucleobase/Ascorbate Transporter (NAT) Family, consists of over 1000 sequenced proteins derived from gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria, archaea, fungi, plants and animals. The NCS2/NAT family is a member of the APC Superfamily of secondary carriers. Of the five known families of transporters that act on nucleobases, NCS2/NAT is the only one that is most widespread. Many functionally characterized members are specific for nucleobases including both purines and pyrimidines, but others are purine-specific. However, two closely related rat/human members of the family, SVCT1 and SVCT2, localized to different tissues of the body, co-transport L-ascorbate (vitamin C) and Na with a high degree of specificity and high affinity for the vitamin. Clustering of NCS2/NAT family members on the phylogenetic tree is complex, with bacterial proteins and eukaryotic proteins each falling into at least three distinct clusters. The plant and animal proteins cluster loosely together, but the fungal proteins branch from one of the three bacterial clusters forming a tighter grouping. \"E. coli\" possesses four distantly related paralogous members of the NCS2 family.\n\nProteins of the NCS2 family are 414–650 amino acyl residues in length and probably possess 14 TMSs. Lu et al. (2011) have concluded from x-ray crystallography that UraA (2.A.40.1.1) has 14 TMSs with two 7 TMS inverted repeats. Uracil is located at the interface between the two domains.\n\nUracil permease, UraA UraA with bound uracil at 2.8Å resolution .\n\nThe generalized transport reactions catalyzed by proteins of the NAT/NCS2 family are:\n\nSeveral proteins make up the NCS2/NAT family. A full list of these proteins can be found in the Transporter Classification Database. \nA few types of proteins that make up the NCS2/NAT family include:\n\n", "id": "35039952", "title": "Nucleobase cation symporter-2"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49219918", "text": "HAAAP family\n\nThe Hydroxy/Aromatic Amino Acid Permease (HAAAP) Family (TC# 2.A.42) is a member of the large Amino Acid-Polyamine-OrganoCation (APC) Superfamily of secondary carriers. Members of the HAAAP family all function in amino acid uptake. Homologues are present in a large number of Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria, with at least one member classified from archaea (TC# 2.A.42.1.7, \"Thermococcus barophilus\")\".\"\n\nProteins of the HAAAP family possess 403-443 amino acyl residues and exhibit eleven putative or established transmembrane α-helical spanners (TMSs). These proteins exhibit topological features common to the eukaryotic amino acid/auxin permease (AAAP) family (TC# 2.A.18). These proteins also exhibit limited sequence similarity with some of the AAAP family members. A phylogenetic relationship has been proposed between members of the HAAAP family and APC family since they exhibit limited sequence similarity with one another.\n\nAs of early 2016, there is no crystal structural data available for members of the HAAAP family in RCSB.\n\nThe HAAAP family includes three well-characterized aromatic amino acid:H symport permeases of \"E. coli\": a high affinity tryptophan-specific permease, Mtr (TC# 2.A.42.1.2), a low affinity tryptophan permease, TnaB (TC# 2.A.42.1.3), and a tyrosine-specific permease, TyrP (TC# 2.A.42.1.1), as well as two well-characterized hydroxy amino acid permeases, the serine permease, SdaC (TC# 2.A.42.2.1), of \"E. coli\", and the threonine permease, TdcC (TC# 2.A.42.2.2), of \"E. coli\". \n\nSdaC of \"E. coli\" (TC# 2.A.42.2.1) is also called DcrA, and together with a periplasmic protein DcrB (P37620), has been reported to play a role in phage DNA uptake in conjunction with an outer membrane receptor of the OMR family (TC# 1.B.14). Thus, FhuA (TC #1.B.14.1.4) transports phage T5 DNA while BtuB (TC# 1.B.14.3.1) transports phage C1 DNA (Samsonov et al., 2002). DcuB is a putative lipoprotein found only in enteric bacteria. \n\nAll members of the HAAAP family can be found in the Transporter Classification Database.\n\nThe generalized transport reaction catalyzed by proteins of the HAAAP family is:\n\nAmino acid (out) + nH (out) → Amino acid (in) + nH (in).\n", "id": "49219918", "title": "HAAAP family"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27493016", "text": "Nucleobase cation symporter-1\n\nThe Nucleobase:Cation Symporter-1 (NCS1) Family (TC# 2.A.39) consists of over 1000 currently sequenced proteins derived from Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria, archaea, fungi and plants. These proteins function as transporters for nucleobases including purines and pyrimidines. Members of this family possess twelve transmembrane α-helical spanners (TMSs). At least some of them have been shown to function in uptake by substrate:H symport mechanism.\n\nThe bacterial and yeast proteins are widely divergent and do not cluster closely on the NCS1 family phylogenetic tree. \"B. subtilis\" possesses two paralogues of the NCS1 family, and \"S. cerevisiae\" has several. Two of the yeast proteins (Dal4 (TC# 2.A.39.3.1) and Fur4 (TC# 2.A.39.3.2)) cluster tightly together. Three other \"S. cerevisiae\" proteins, one of which is the thiamin permease, Thi10 (TC# 2.A.39.4.1), and another of which is the nicotinamide riboside transporter, Nrt1 (TC# 2.A.39.4.2), also cluster tightly together. The latter three proteins are likely to be closely related thiamin permease isoforms. The yeast cytosine-purine and vitamin B6 transporters cluster loosely together (24% identity; e-50). The bacterial proteins are derived from several Gram-negative and Gram-positive species. These proteins exhibit limited sequence similarity with the xanthine permease, PbuX (TC# 2.A.39.4.1), of \"Bacillus subtilis\" which is a member of the NCS2 family.\n\nProteins of the NCS1 family are 419-635 amino acyl residues long and possess twelve putative transmembrane α-helical spanners (TMSs). At least some of them have been shown to function in uptake by substrate:H symport. In these respects, and with respect to substrate specificity, these proteins resemble the symporters of the NCS2 family, providing further evidence that the two families represent distant constituents of a single superfamily, the APC Superfamily. The two families probably arose by an early gene duplication event that occurred long before divergence of the three major kingdoms of life. It is possible that they are distant constituents of the MFS (2.A.1).\n\nThe nucleobase-cation-symport-1 (NCS1) transporters are essential components of salvage pathways for nucleobases and related metabolites. Weyand et al. (2008) reported the 2.85-angstrom resolution structure of the NCS1 benzyl-hydantoin transporter, Mhp1 (TC# 2.A.39.3.6), from \"Microbacterium liquefaciens\". This structure (and related structures) are available through RCSB (, , , , , ). Mhp1 contains 12 transmembrane helices, 10 of which are arranged in two inverted repeats of five helices. The structures of the outward-facing open and substrate-bound occluded conformations were solved, showing how the outward-facing cavity closes upon binding of substrate. Comparisons with the leucine transporter LeuT(Aa) and the galactose transporter vSGLT reveal that the outward- and inward-facing cavities are symmetrically arranged on opposite sides of the membrane. The reciprocal opening and closing of these cavities is synchronized by the inverted repeat helices 3 and 8, providing the structural basis of the alternating access model for membrane transport.\n\nNCS1 proteins are H/Na symporters specific for the uptake of purines, pyrimidines and related metabolites. Krypotou et al. 2015 studied the origin, diversification and substrate specificities of fungal NCS1 transporters, suggesting that the two fungal NCS1 subfamilies, Fur and Fcy, and plant homologues, originated through independent horizontal transfers from prokaryotes. Expansion by gene duplication led to functional diversification of fungal NCS1 porters. They characterized all Fur proteins in Aspergillus nidulans. Homology modelling, substrate docking, molecular dynamics and systematic mutational analysis in three Fur transporters with distinct specificities identified residues critical for function and specificity, located within a major substrate binding site, in transmembrane segments TMS1, TMS3, TMS6 and TMS8. They predicted and confirmed that residues determining substrate specificity are located not only in the major substrate binding site, but also in a putative outward-facing selectivity gate. Their evolutionary and structure-function analyses led to the concept that selective channel-like gates may contribute to substrate specificity.\n\nThe generalized transport reaction catalyzed by NCS1 family permeases is:\n\n", "id": "27493016", "title": "Nucleobase cation symporter-1"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48050134", "text": "Microbial rhodopsin\n\nMicrobial rhodopsin, also known as type-I rhodopsin, is a photochemically active membrane protein composed of seven transmembrane alpha-helices with a retinal chromophore. It includes light-driven proton pumps, ion pumps and ion channels, as well as light sensors. Microbial rhodopsins are found in Archaea, Bacteria, and Eukaryota, as well as in viruses; although it is rare in complex multicellular organisms.\n\nRhodopsin was originally a synonym for \"visual purple\", a visual pigment (light-sensitive molecule) found in the retinas of frogs and other vertebrates, used for dim-light vision, and usually found in rod cells. This is still the meaning of rhodopsin in the narrow sense, any protein evolutionarily homologous to this protein. In a broad non-genetic sense, rhodopsin refers to any molecule, whether related by genetic descent or not (mostly not), consisting of an opsin and a chromophore (generally a variant of retinal). All animal rhodopsins arose (by gene duplication and divergence) late in the history of the large GPCR [G-Protein Coupled Receptor] gene family, which itself arose after the divergence of plants, fungi, choanflagellates and sponges from the earliest animals. The retinal chromophore is found solely in the opsin branch of this large gene family, meaning its occurrence elsewhere represents convergent evolution, not homology.\n\nThe term bacterial rhodopsin originally referred to the first microbial rhodopsin discovered, known today as bacteriorhodopsin. The first bacteriorhodopsin turned out to be of archaeal origin, from \"Halobacterium salinarum\". Since then, other microbial rhodopsins have been discovered, rendering the term \"bacterial rhodopsin\" ambiguous.\n\nBelow is a list of some of the more well-known microbial rhodopsins and some of their properties.\n\nThe Ion-translocating Microbial Rhodopsin (MR) Family (TC# 3.E.1) is a member of the TOG Superfamily of secondary carriers. Members of the MR family catalyze light-driven ion translocation across microbial cytoplasmic membranes or serve as light receptors. Most proteins of the MR family are all of about the same size (250-350 amino acyl residues) and possess seven transmembrane helical spanners with their N-termini on the outside and their C-termini on the inside. There are 9 subfamilies in the MR family:\n\n(1) Bacteriorhodopsins pump protons out of the cell;\n\n(2) Halorhodopsins pump chloride (and other anions such as bromide, iodide and nitrate) into the cell;\n\n(3) Sensory rhodopsins, which normally function as receptors for phototactic behavior, are capable of pumping protons out of the cell if dissociated from their transducer proteins;\n\n(4) the Fungal Chaparones are stress-induced proteins of ill-defined biochemical function, but this subfamily also includes a H-pumping rhodopsin;\n\n(5) the bacterial rhodopsin, called Proteorhodopsin, is a light-driven proton pump that functions as does bacteriorhodopsins;\n\n(6) the \"Neurospora crassa\" retinal-containing receptor serves as a photoreceptor (Neurospora ospin I);\n\n(7) the green algal light-gated proton channel, Channelrhodpsin-1;\n\n(8) Sensory rhodopsins from cyanobacteria.\n\n(9) Light-activated rhodopsin/guanylyl cyclase\n\nA phylogenetic analysis of microbial rhodopsins and a detailed analysis of potential examples of horizontal gene transfer have been published.\n\nAmong the high resolution structures for members of the MR Family are the archaeal proteins, bacteriorhodopsin , sensory rhodopsin II, halorhodopsin as well as an \"Anabaena\" cyanobacterial sensory rhodopsin(TC# 3.E.1.1.6). and others.\n\nThe association of sensory rhodopsins with their transducer proteins appears to determine whether they function as transporters or receptors. Association of a sensory rhodopsin receptor with its transducer occurs via the transmembrane helical domains of the two interacting proteins. There are two sensory rhodopsins in any one halophilic archaeon, one (SRI) that responds positively to orange light but negatively to blue light, the other (SRII) that responds only negatively to blue light. Each transducer is specific for its cognate receptor. An x-ray structure of SRII complexed with its transducer (HtrII) at 1.94 Å resolution is available (). Molecular and evolutionary aspects of the light-signal transduction by microbial sensory receptors have been reviewed.\n\nHomologues include putative fungal chaperone proteins, a retinal-containing rhodopsin from \"Neurospora crassa\", a H-pumping rhodopsin from \"Leptosphaeria maculans\", retinal-containing proton pumps isolated from marine bacteria, a green light-activated photoreceptor in cyanobacteria that does not pump ions and interacts with a small (14 kDa) soluble transducer protein and light-gated H channels from the green alga, \"Chlamydomonas reinhardtii\". The \"N. crassa\" NOP-1 protein exhibits a photocycle and conserved H translocation residues that suggest that this putative photoreceptor is a slow H pump.\n\nMost of the MR family homologues in yeast and fungi are of about the same size and topology as the archaeal proteins (283-344 amino acyl residues; 7 putative transmembrane α-helical segments), but they are heat shock- and toxic solvent-induced proteins of unknown biochemical function. They have been suggested to function as pmf-driven chaperones that fold extracellular proteins, but only indirect evidence supports this postulate. The MR family is distantly related to the 7 TMS LCT family (TC# 2.A.43). Representative members of MR family can be found in the Transporter Classification Database.\n\nBacterio- and halorhodopsins pump 1 H and 1 Cl per photon absorbed, respectively. Specific transport mechanisms and pathways have been proposed. The mechanism involves:\n\n(1) photo-isomerization of the retinal and its initial configurational changes,\n\n(2) deprotonation of the retinal Schiff base and the coupled release of a proton to the extracellular membrane surface,\n\n(3) the switch event that allows reprotonation of the Schiff base from the cytoplasmic side.\n\nSix structural models describe the transformations of the retinal and its interaction with water 402, Asp85, and Asp212 in atomic detail, as well as the displacements of functional residues farther from the Schiff base. The changes provide rationales for how relaxation of the distorted retinal causes movements of water and protein atoms that result in vectorial proton transfers to and from the Schiff base. Helix deformation is coupled to vectorial proton transport in the photocycle of bacteriorhodopsin.\n\nMost residues participating in the trimerization are not conserved in bacteriorhodopsin, a homologous protein capable of forming a trimeric structure in the absence of bacterioruberin. Despite a large alteration in the amino acid sequence, the shape of the intratrimer hydrophobic space filled by lipids is highly conserved between archaerhodopsin-2 and bacteriorhodopsin. Since a transmembrane helix facing this space undergoes a large conformational change during the proton pumping cycle, it is feasible that trimerization is an important strategy to capture special lipid components that are relevant to the protein activity.\n\nA marine bacterial rhodopsin has been reported to function as a proton pump. However, it also resembles sensory rhodopsin II of archaea as well as an Orf from the fungus \"Leptosphaeria maculans\" (AF290180). These proteins exhibit 20-30% identity with each other.\n\nChannelrhodopsin-1 (ChR1) or channelopsin-1 (Chop1; Cop3; CSOA) of \"C. reinhardtii\" is closely related to the archaeal sensory rhodopsins. It has 712 aas with a signal peptide, followed by a short amphipathic region, and then a hydrophobic N-terminal domain with seven probable TMSs (residues 76-309) followed by a long hydrophilic C-terminal domain of about 400 residues. Part of the C-terminal hydrophilic domain is homologous to intersectin (EH and SH3 domain protein 1A) of animals (AAD30271).\n\nChop1 serves as a light-gated proton channel and mediates phototaxis and photophobic responses in green algae. Based on this phenotype, Chop1 could be assigned to TC category #1.A, but because it belongs to a family in which well-characterized homologues catalyze active ion transport, it is assigned to the MR family. Expression of the \"chop1\" gene, or a truncated form of that gene encoding only the hydrophobic core (residues 1-346 or 1-517) in frog oocytes in the presence of all-trans retinal produces a light-gated conductance that shows characteristics of a channel passively but selectively permeable to protons. This channel activity probably generates bioelectric currents.\n\nA homologue of ChR1 in \"C. reinhardtii\" is channelrhodopsin-2 (ChR2; Chop2; Cop4; CSOB). This protein is 57% identical, 10% similar to ChR1. It forms a cation-selective ion channel activated by light absorption. It transports both monovalent and divalent cations. It desensitizes to a small conductance in continuous light. Recovery from desensitization is accelerated by extracellular H and a negative membrane potential. It may be a photoreceptor for dark adapted cells. A transient increase in hydration of transmembrane α-helices with a t(1/2) = 60 μs tallies with the onset of cation permeation. Aspartate 253 accepts the proton released by the Schiff base (t(1/2) = 10 μs), with the latter being reprotonated by aspartic acid 156 (t(1/2) = 2 ms). The internal proton acceptor and donor groups, corresponding to D212 and D115 in bacteriorhodopsin, are clearly different from other microbial rhodopsins, indicating that their spatial positions in the protein were relocated during evolution. E90 deprotonates exclusively in the nonconductive state. The observed proton transfer reactions and the protein conformational changes relate to the gating of the cation channel.\n\nArchaerhodopsin-2 (aR2) was found in the claret membrane of \"Halorubrum sp\". It is a light-driven proton pump. Trigonal and hexagonal crystals revealed that trimers are arranged on a honeycomb lattice. In these crystals, the carotenoid bacterioruberin binds to crevices between the subunits of the trimer. Its polyene chain is inclined from the membrane normal by an angle of about 20 degrees and, on the cytoplasmic side, it is surrounded by helices AB and DE of neighboring subunits. This peculiar binding mode suggests that bacterioruberin plays a structural role for the trimerization of aR2. When compared with the aR2 structure in another crystal form containing no bacterioruberin, the proton release channel takes a more closed conformation in the P321 or P6(3) crystal; i.e., the native conformation of protein is stabilized in the trimeric protein-bacterioruberin complex.\n\nThe generalized transport reaction for bacterio- and sensory rhodopsins is:\n\nThat for halorhodopsin is:\n\n", "id": "48050134", "title": "Microbial rhodopsin"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49292515", "text": "Nicotinamide ribonucleoside uptake transporters\n\nThe Nicotinamide Ribonucleoside (NR) Uptake Permease (PnuC) Family (TC# 4.B.1) is a family of transmembrane transporters that is part of the TOG superfamily. Close PnuC homologues are found in a wide range of Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria, archaea and eukaryotes.\n\nPnuC of \"Salmonella typhimurium\" and \"Haemophilus influenzae\" are believed to function cooperatively with NadR homologues, multifunctional proteins that together with PnuC, participate in NR phosphorylation, transport and transcriptional regulation. NadR, a cytoplasmic protein that is partly membrane associated, contains one well conserved and one poorly conserved mononucleotide-binding consensus sequence (G-X4 GKS). It drives transport and may render transport responsive to internal pyridine nucleotide levels. While its N-terminal half functions as a repressor, its C-terminal half functions as an NR kinase in a putative group translocation process.\n\nThe \"H. influenzae\" homologue has been shown to transport NR from the periplasm into the cytoplasm. Phosphorylation of NR by NadR is required for NR uptake. The ribonucleoside kinase (RNK) domain has both Walker A and Walker B motifs, responsible for ATP binding and phosphoryl transfer. In addition, a proposed LID domain was identified in RNK. LID domains have been found in other kinases, and these domains are regions which are able to move after substrate binding. They are responsible for coordination of three distinct conformations, an open state in the absence of substrate, a partially closed state after substrate binding, and a fully closed state when both substrates are present.\n\nIn \"H. influenzae\", NR enters the NAD resynthesis pathway after phosphorylation to NMN, and subsequently, NAD is synthesized from NMN and ATP via an NMN adenylyl transferase activity. Summarizing these features, NadR represents an amazing multifunctional regulator/enzyme complex able to integrate several features, such as enzymatic catalysis, transport, and transcriptional regulatory activities.\n\nThe components of the \"H. influenzae\" pathway necessary for NAD, NMN, and NR uptake have been determined. Merdanovic et al. characterized two enzymes, an outer membrane nucleotide phosphatase, and an NAD nucleotidase (NadN) located in the periplasm. They showed that NAD and NMN cross the outer membrane mainly via the OmpP2 porin.\n\nOnly NR can be utilized by the PnuC transport system located in the inner membrane. The \"pnuC\" gene product is the protein that is responsible for the main flow of the NR substrate into the cytoplasm. The study of Merdanovic et al. suggests that the RNK activity of NadR determines NR transport and is negatively regulated by cytoplasmic NAD feedback inhibition. Therefore, NR uptake is under NadR feedback control.\n\nATP, not the proton motive force, appears to be required for NR uptake. Thus, the driving force for NR uptake via PnuC is NR phosphorylation by NadR. A concerted group translocation mechanism can be considered whereby NadR facilitates the dissociation of NR from PnuC by phosphorylating it to NMN, thus preventing efflux of NR.\n\nThe proposed transport reaction catalyzed by PnuC and NadR is:\n\nNR (out) + ATP (in) → NMN (in) + ADP (in).\n\nPnuC of \"Salmonella typhimurium\" and \"Haemophilus influenzae\" are integral membrane proteins, 239 and 226 amino acyl residues (aas) in length, respectively, with 7 putative transmembrane α-helical segments.\n\nThe structure of NadR has been determined. Mutations in the \"nadR\" gene which interfere with NR uptake occur in the C-terminal part of NadR. A helix-turn-helix DNA binding domain present in NadR of \"S. enterica serovar Typhimurium\" could not be found in the NadR homologue of \"H. influenzae\". Therefore, it was proposed that in \"H. influenzae\" NadR has no regulatory function at the transcriptional level. The structures of the human NR kinase 1 (2QL6_P) with nucleotide and nucleoside substrates bound have been solved. It is structurally similar to Rossmann fold metabolite kinases.\n\nPnuC has been shown to resemble SWEET porters in overall fold, supporting the conclusion that these two families are members of the TOG superfamily.\n\nNadR Protein from \"H. influenzae\" \n\nNR transporter PnuC \n", "id": "49292515", "title": "Nicotinamide ribonucleoside uptake transporters"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49293529", "text": "Natural Resistance-Associated Macrophage Proteins\n\nNatural Resistance-Associated Macrophage Proteins (NRAMPs) are members of the Metal Ion (Mn-iron) Transporter (NRAMP) Family (TC# 2.A.55). The NRAMP family is a member of the large APC Superfamily of secondary carriers. Homologues of this family are found in various yeasts, plants, animals, archaea, and Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria termed \"natural resistance-associated\" macrophage proteins because one of the animal homologues plays a role in resistance to intracellular bacterial pathogens such as \"Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium\", \"Leishmania donovani\" and \"Mycobacterium bovis\". The natural history of \"SLC11\" genes in vertebrates has been discussed by Neves et al. (2011). Proposed to be a distant member of the APC Superfamily, several human pathologies may result from defects in NRAMP-dependent Fe or Mn transport, including iron overload, neurodegenerative diseases and innate susceptibility to infectious diseases.\n\nHumans and rodents possess two distinct NRAMPs. The broad specificity NRAMP2 (DMT1), which transports a range of divalent metal cations, transports Fe and H with a 1:1 stoichiometry and apparent affinities of 6 μm and about 1 μm, respectively. Variable H:Fe stoichiometry has also been reported. The order of substrate preference for NRAMP2 is:\n\nFe> Zn> Mn> Co> Ca> Cu> Ni> Pb\n\nMany of these ions can inhibit iron absorption. Mutation of NRAMP2 in rodents leads to defective endosomal iron export within the ferritin cycle, impaired intestinal iron absorption and microcytic anemia. Symptoms of Mn deficiency are also seen. It is found in apical membranes of intestinal epithelial cells but also in late endosomes and lysosomes.\n\nIn contrast to the widely expressed NRAMP2, NRAMP1 is expressed primarily in macrophages and monocytes and appears to have a preference for Mn rather than Fe. NRAMP1 (TC# 2.A.55.2.3) has been reported to function by metal:H antiport. It is hypothesized that a deficiency for Mn or some other metal prevents the generation of reactive oxygenic and nitrogenic compounds that are used by macrophage to combat pathogens. This hypothesis is supported by studies on the bacterial NRAMP homologues which exhibit extremely high selectivity for Mn over Fe, Zn and other divalent cations. Regulation of these transporters in bacteria can occur through Fur, OxyR, and most commonly a DtxR homolog, MntR.\n\nThe Smf1 protein of \"Saccharomyces cerevisiae\" appears to catalyze high-affinity (\"K\" = 0.3 μm) Mn uptake while the closely related Smf2 protein may catalyze low affinity (\"K\" = 60 μm) Mn uptake in the same organism. Both proteins also mediate H-dependent Fe uptake. These proteins are of 575 and 549 amino acyl residues in length and are predicted to have 8-12 transmembrane α-helical spanners. The \"E. coli\" homologue of 412 aas exhibits 11 putative and confirmed TMSs with the N-terminus in and the C-terminus out. The yeast proteins may be localized to the vacuole and/or the plasma membrane of the yeast cell. Indirect and some direct experiments suggest that they may be able to transport several heavy metals including Mn, Cu, Cd and Co. A third yeast protein, Smf3p, appears to be exclusively intracellular, possibly in the Golgi. NRAMP2 (\"Slc11A2\") of Homo sapiens (TC# 2.A.55.2.1) has a 12 TMS topology with intracellular N- and C-termini. Two-fold structural symmetry in the arrangement of membrane helices for TM1-5 and TM6-10 (conserved Slc2 hydrophobic core) is suggested.\n\nThe generalized transport reaction catalyzed by NRAMP family proteins is:\n\nMe (out) + H (out) ⇌ Me (in) + H (in).\n\n", "id": "49293529", "title": "Natural Resistance-Associated Macrophage Proteins"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35038842", "text": "Formate-nitrite transporter\n\nThe Formate-Nitrite Transporter (FNT) Family belongs to the Major Intrinsic Protein (MIP) Superfamily. FNT family members have been sequenced from Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria, archaea, yeast, plants and lower eukaryotes. The prokaryotic proteins of the FNT family probably function in the transport of the structurally related compounds, formate and nitrite.\n\nWith the exception of the yeast protein (627 amino acyl residues), all characterized members of the family are of 256-285 residues in length and exhibit 6-8 putative transmembrane α-helical spanners (TMSs). In one case, that of the \"E. coli\" FocA (TC# 1.A.16.1.1) protein, a 6 TMS topology has been established. The yeast protein has a similar apparent topology but has a large C-terminal hydrophilic extension of about 400 residues.\n\nFocA of \"E. coli\" is a symmetriv pentamer, with each subunit consisting of six TMSs.\n\nThe phylogenetic tree shows clustering according to function and organismal phylogeny. The putative formate efflux transporters (FocA; TC#s 1.A.16.1.1 and 1.A.16.1.3) of bacteria associated with pyruvate-formate lyase (pfl) comprise cluster I; the putative formate uptake permeases (FdhC; TC#s 1.A.16.2.1 and 1.A.16.2.3) of bacteria and archaea associated with formate dehydrogenase comprise cluster II; the nitrite uptake permeases (NirC, TC#s 1.A.16.2.5, 1.A.16.3.1, and 1.A.16.3.4) of bacteria comprise cluster III, and a yeast protein comprises cluster IV.\n\nThe energy coupling mechanisms for proteins of the FNT family have not been extensively characterized. HCO and NO uptakes may be coupled to H symport. HCO efflux may be driven by the membrane potential by a uniport mechanism or by H antiport. FocA of \"E. coli\" catalyzes bidirectional formate transport and may function by a channel-type mechanism.\n\nFocA, transports short-chain acids. FocA may be able to switch its mode of operation from a passive export channel at high external pH to a secondary active formate/H+ importer at low pH. The crystal structure of \"Salmonella typhimurium\" FocA at pH 4.0 shows that this switch involves a major rearrangement of the amino termini of individual protomers in the pentameric channel. The amino-terminal helices open or block transport in a concerted, cooperative action that indicates how FocA is gated in a pH-dependent way. Electrophysiological studies show that the protein acts as a specific formate channel at pH 7.0 and that it closes upon a shift of pH to 5.1.\n\nThe probable transport reactions catalyzed by different members of the FNT family are:\n\n(1) RCO or NO (out) ⇌ RCO or NO (in),\n\n(2) HCO (in) ⇌ HCO (out),\n\n(3) HS (out) ⇌ HS (in).\n\nA representative list of the currently classified members belonging to the FNT family can be found in the Transporter Classification Database. Some characterized members include:\n\n", "id": "35038842", "title": "Formate-nitrite transporter"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35049854", "text": "Cation diffusion facilitator\n\nCation diffusion facilitators (CDFs) are transmembrane proteins that provide tolerance of cells to divalent metal ions, such as cadmium, zinc, and cobalt. These proteins are considered to be efflux pumps that remove these divalent metal ions from cells. However, some members of the CDF superfamily are implicated in ion uptake. All members of the CDF family possess six putative transmembrane spanners with strongest conservation in the four N-terminal spanners. The Cation Diffusion Facilitator (CDF) Superfamily includes the following families: \n\nThe CDF family (TC# 2.A.4) is a ubiquitous family, members of which are found in bacteria, archaea and eukaryotes. They transport heavy metal ions, such as cadmium, zinc, cobalt, nickel, copper and mercuric ions. There are 9 mammalian paralogues, ZnT1 - 8 and 10. Most proteins from the family have six transmembrane helices, but MSC2 of \"S. cerevisiae\") and Znt5 and hZTL1 of \"H. sapiens\" have 15 and 12 predicted TMSs, respectively. These proteins exhibit an unusual degree of sequence divergence and size variation (300-750 residues). Eukaryotic proteins exhibit differences in cell localization. Some catalyze heavy metal uptake from the cytoplasm into various intracellular eukaryotic organelles (ZnT2-7) while others (ZnT1) catalyze efflux from the cytoplasm across the plasma membrane into the extracellular medium. Thus, some are found in plasma membranes while others are in organellar membranes such as vacuoles of plants and yeast and the golgi of animals. They catalyze cation:proton antiport, have a single essential zinc-binding site within the transmembrane domains of each monomer within the dimer, and have a binuclear zinc-sensing and binding site in the cytoplamsic C-terminal region. A representative list of proteins belonging to the CDF family can be found in the Transporter Classification Database.\n\nProkaryotic and eukaryotic proteins cluster separately but may function with the same polarity by similar mechanisms. These proteins are secondary carriers which utilize the proton motive force (pmf) and function by H antiport (for metal efflux). One member, CzcD of \"Bacillus subtilis\" (TC# 2.A.4.1.3) \",\" has been shown to exchange the divalent cation (Zn or Cd ) for two monovalent cations (K and H ) in an electroneutral process energized by the transmembrane pH gradient. Another, ZitB of \"E. coli\" (TC #2.A.4.1.4), has been reconstituted in proteoliposomes and studied kinetically. It appears to function by simple Me:H antiport with a 1:1 stoichiometry.\n\nMontanini et al. (2007) have conducted phylogenetic analysis of CDF family members. Their analysis revealed three major and two minor phylogenetic groups. They suggest that the three major groups segregated according to metal ion specificity: \n\nX-ray structure of YiiP of \"E. coli\" represents a homodimer.\n\nCoudray et al. (2013) used cryoelectron microscopy to determine a 13 Å resolution structure of a YiiP homolog from \"Shewanella oneidensis\" within a lipid bilayer in the absence of Zn. Starting from the x-ray structure in the presence of Zn, they used molecular dynamic flexible fitting to build a model. Comparison of the structures suggested a conformational change that involves pivoting of a transmembrane, four-helix bundle (M1, M2, M4, and M5) relative to the M3-M6 helix pair. Although accessibility of transport sites in the x-ray model indicates that it represents an outward-facing state, their model was consistent with an inward-facing state, suggesting that the conformational change is relevant to the alternating access mechanism for transport. They speculated that the dimer may coordinate rearrangement of the transmembrane helices.\n\nInvolved in metal tolerance/resistance by efflux, most CDF proteins share a two-modular architecture consisting of a transmembrane domain (TMD) and a C-terminal domain (CTD) that protrudes into the cytoplasm. A Zn and Cd CDF transporter from the marine bacterium, \"Maricaulis maris,\" that does not possess the CTD is a member of a new, CTD-lacking subfamily of CDFs.\n\nThe generalized transport reaction for CDF family members is:\n\nMe (in) H (out) ± K (out) → Me (out) H (in) ± K (in).\n\n", "id": "35049854", "title": "Cation diffusion facilitator"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8553751", "text": "Biological organisation\n\nBiological organization is the hierarchy of complex biological structures and systems that define life using a reductionistic approach. The traditional hierarchy, as detailed below, extends from atoms to biospheres. The higher levels of this scheme are often referred to as an ecological organisation concept, or as the field, hierarchical ecology.\n\nEach level in the hierarchy represents an increase in organisational complexity, with each \"object\" being primarily composed of the previous level's basic unit. The basic principle behind the organisation is the concept of \"emergence\"—the properties and functions found at a hierarchical level are not present and irrelevant at the lower levels.\n\nThe biological organisation of life is a fundamental premise for numerous areas of scientific research, particularly in the medical sciences. Without this necessary degree of organisation, it would be much more difficult—and likely impossible—to apply the study of the effects of various physical and chemical phenomena to diseases and physiology (body function). For example, fields such as cognitive and behavioral neuroscience could not exist if the brain was not composed of specific types of cells, and the basic concepts of pharmacology could not exist if it was not known that a change at the cellular level can affect an entire organism. These applications extend into the ecological levels as well. For example, DDT's direct inseciticidal effect occurs at the subcellular level, but affects higher levels up to and including multiple ecosystems. Theoretically, a change in one atom could change the entire biosphere.\n\nThe simple standard biological organisation scheme, from the lowest level to the highest level, is as follows:\n\nMore complex schemes incorporate many more levels. For example, a molecule can be viewed as a grouping of elements, and an atom can be further divided into subatomic particles (these levels are outside the scope of biological organisation). Each level can also be broken down into its own hierarchy, and specific types of these biological objects can have their own hierarchical scheme. For example, genomes can be further subdivided into a hierarchy of genes.\n\nEach level in the hierarchy can be described by its lower levels. For example, the organism may be described at any of its component levels, including the atomic, molecular, cellular, histological (tissue), organ and organ system levels. Furthermore, at every level of the hierarchy, new functions necessary for the control of life appear. These new roles are not functions that the lower level components are capable of and are thus referred to as \"emergent properties\".\n\nEvery organism is organised, though not necessarily to the same degree. An organism can not be organised at the histological (tissue) level if it is not composed of tissues in the first place.\n\nEmpirically, a large proportion of the (complex) biological systems we observe in nature exhibit hierarchic structure. On theoretical grounds we could expect complex systems to be hierarchies in a world in which complexity had to evolve from simplicity. System hierarchies analysis performed in the 1950s, laid the empirical foundations for a field that would be, from 1980's, hierarchical ecology.\n\nThe theoretical foundations are summarized by Thermodynamics.\nWhen biological systems are modeled as physical systems, in its most general abstraction, they are thermodynamic open systems that exhibit self-organised behavior, and the set/subset relations between dissipative structures can be characterized in an hierarchy.\n\nA simpler and more direct way to explain the fundamentals of the \"hierarchical organisation of life\", was introduced in Ecology by Odum and others as the \"Simon's hierarchical principle\"; Simon emphasized that hierarchy \"\"emerges almost inevitably through a wide variety of evolutionary processes, for the simple reason that hierarchical structures are stable\"\".\n\nTo motivate this deep idea, he offered his \"parable\" about imaginary watchmakers.\n\n\n", "id": "8553751", "title": "Biological organisation"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2537522", "text": "Biologist\n\nA biologist, is a scientist who has specialized knowledge in the field of biology, the scientific study of life. Biologists involved in fundamental research attempt to explore and further explain the underlying mechanisms that govern the functioning of living matter. Biologists involved in applied research attempt to develop or improve more specific processes and understanding, in fields such as medicine, industry and agriculture.\n\nWhile \"biologist\" can apply to any scientist studying biology, most biologists research and specialise in specific fields. In this way, biologists investigate large-scale organism interactions (ecology), whole multicellular organisms, organs, tissues, cells, and small-scale cellular and molecular processes. Other biologists study less direct aspects of life, such as phylogeny and evolution.\n\nBiologists conduct research based on the scientific method, to test the validity of a theory, with hypothesis formation, experimentation and documentation of protocols and datas.\n\nThere are many types of biologists. Some work on microorganisms, while others study multicellular organisms. There is much overlap between different fields of biology such as botany, zoology, microbiology, genetics and evolutionary biology, and it is often difficult to classify a biologist as only one of them. Many jobs in biology as a field require an academic degree. A doctorate or its equivalent is generally required to direct independent research, and involves a specialization in a specific area of biology. Many biological scientists work in research and development. Some conduct fundamental research to advance our knowledge of living organisms, including bacteria and other pathogens. This research enhances understanding and adds to the scientific database of literature. Furthermore, it often aids the development of solutions to problems in areas such as human health and the natural environment. These biological scientists mostly work in government, university, and private industry laboratories. Many expand on specialized research that they started in post-graduate qualifications, such as a doctorate.\n\nBiological scientists who work in applied research or product development often use knowledge gained by basic research to further knowledge in particular fields or applications. For example, this applied research may be used to develop new pharmaceutical drugs, treatments, and medical diagnostic tests; increase crop yields; and develop biofuels. They usually have less freedom than basic researchers to choose the emphasis of their research, and they spend more time working on marketable treatments to meet the business goals of their employers. Biological scientists conducting applied research and product development in private industry may be required to describe their research plans or results to non-scientists who are in a position to veto or approve their ideas. These scientists must consider the business effects of their work.\n\nSome biologists conduct laboratory experiments involving animals, plants or microorganisms. However, some biological research also occurs outside the laboratory and may involve natural observation rather than experimentation. For example, a botanist may investigate the plant species present in a particular environment, while an ecologist might study how a forest area recovers after a fire.\n\nSwift advances in knowledge of genetics and organic molecules spurred growth in the field of biotechnology, transforming the industries in which biological scientists work. Biological scientists can now manipulate the genetic material of animals and plants, attempting to make organisms more productive or resistant to disease. Basic and applied research on biotechnological processes, such as recombining DNA, has led to the production of important substances, including human insulin and growth hormone. Many other substances not previously available in large quantities are now produced by biotechnological means. Some of these substances are useful in treating diseases.\n\nThose working on various genome (chromosomes with their associated genes) projects isolate genes and determine their function. This work continues to lead to the discovery of genes associated with specific diseases and inherited health risks, such as sickle cell anemia. Advances in biotechnology have created research opportunities in almost all areas of biology, with commercial applications in areas such as medicine, agriculture, and environmental remediation.\n\nMost biological scientists specialize in the study of a certain type of organism or in a specific activity, although recent advances have blurred some traditional classifications.\n\nBiological scientists are not usually exposed to unsafe or unhealthy conditions. Those who work with dangerous organisms or toxic substances in the laboratory must follow strict safety procedures to avoid contamination. Many biological scientists, such as botanists, ecologists, and zoologists, conduct field studies that involve strenuous physical activity and primitive living conditions. Biological scientists in the field may work in warm or cold climates, in all kinds of weather.\n\nMarine biologists encounter a variety of working conditions. Some work in laboratories; others work on research ships, and those who work underwater must practice safe diving while working around sharp coral reefs and hazardous marine life. Although some marine biologists obtain their specimens from the sea, many still spend a good deal of their time in laboratories and offices, conducting tests, running experiments, recording results, and compiling data.\n\nMany biological scientists depend on grant money to fund their research. They may be under pressure to meet deadlines and to conform to rigid grant-writing specifications when preparing proposals to seek new or extended funding.\n\nBiological scientists typically work regular hours. While the 40-hour workweek is common, longer hours are not uncommon. Researchers may be required to work odd hours in laboratories or other locations (especially while in the field), depending on the nature of their research.\n\nThe highest honor awarded to biologists is the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, awarded since 1901, by the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences. Another significant award is the Crafoord Prize in Biosciences; established in 1980.\n\n\n", "id": "2537522", "title": "Biologist"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44707607", "text": "Bibliography of encyclopedias: biology\n\nThis is a list of encyclopedias as well as encyclopedic and biographical dictionaries published on the subject of biology in any language.\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\nref name=\"K371\"/> \n\n", "id": "44707607", "title": "Bibliography of encyclopedias: biology"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12936761", "text": "MACPF\n\nThe Membrane Attack Complex/Perforin (MACPF) superfamily, sometimes referred to as the MACPF/CDC superfamily, is named after a domain that is common to the membrane attack complex (MAC) proteins of the complement system (C6, C7, C8α, C8β and C9) and perforin (PF). Members of this protein family are pore-forming toxins (PFTs). In eukaryotes, MACPF proteins play a role in immunity and development.\n\nArchetypal members of the family are complement C9 and perforin, both of which function in human immunity. C9 functions by punching holes in the membranes of Gram-negative bacteria. Perforin is released by cytotoxic T cells and lyses virally infected and transformed cells. In addition, perforin permits delivery of cytotoxic proteases called granzymes that cause cell death. Deficiency of either protein can result in human disease. Structural studies reveal that MACPF domains are related to cholesterol-dependent cytolysins (CDCs), a family of pore forming toxins previously thought to only exist in bacteria.\n\nAs of early 2016, there are three families belonging to the MACPF superfamily:\n\nProteins containing MACPF domains play key roles in vertebrate immunity, embryonic development, and neural-cell migration. The ninth component of complement and perforin form oligomeric pores that lyse bacteria and kill virus-infected cells, respectively. The crystal structure of a bacterial MACPF protein, Plu-MACPF from \"Photorhabdus luminescens\" was determined (). The MACPF domain is structurally similar to pore-forming cholesterol-dependent cytolysins from gram-positive bacteria, suggesting that MACPF proteins create pores and disrupt cell membranes similar to cytolysin. A representative list of proteins belonging to the MACPF family can be found in the Transporter Classification Database.\n\nMany proteins belonging to the MACPF superfamily play key roles in plant and animal immunity.\n\nComplement proteins C6-C9 all contain a MACPF domain and assemble into the membrane attack complex. C6, C7 and C8β appear to be non-lytic and function as scaffold proteins within the MAC. In contrast both C8α and C9 are capable of lysing cells. The final stage of MAC formation involves polymerisation of C9 into a large pore that punches a hole in the outer membrane of gram-negative bacteria.\n\nPerforin is stored in granules within cytotoxic T-cells and is responsible for killing virally infected and transformed cells. Perforin functions via two distinct mechanisms. Firstly, like C9, high concentrations of perforin can form pores that lyse cells. Secondly, perforin permits delivery of the cytotoxic granzymes A and B into target cells. Once delivered, granzymes are able to induce apoptosis and cause target cell death.\n\nThe plant protein CAD1 (TC# 1.C.39.11.3) functions in the plant immune response to bacterial infection.\n\nThe sea anemone \"Actineria villosa\" uses a MACPF (AvTX-60A; TC# 1.C.39.10.1)protein as a lethal toxin.\n\nMACPF proteins are also important for the invasion of the Malarial parasite into the mosquito host and the liver.\n\nNot all MACPF proteins function in defence or attack. For example, astrotactin-1 (TC# 9.B.87.3.1) is involved in neural cell migration in mammals and apextrin (TC# 1.C.39.7.4) is involved in sea urchin (\"Heliocidaris erythrogramma\") development. \"Drosophila\" Torso-like protein (TC# 1.C.39.15.1), which controls embryonic patterning, also contains a MACPF domain. Its function is implicated in a receptor tyrosine kinase signaling pathway that specifies differentiation and terminal cell fate.\n\nFunctionally uncharacterised MACPF proteins are sporadically distributed in bacteria. Several species of \"Chlamydia\" contain MACPF proteins. The insect pathogenic bacteria \"Photorhabdus luminescens\" also contains a MACPF protein, however, this molecule appears non-lytic.\n\nThe X-ray crystal structure of Plu-MACPF, a protein from the insect pathogenic enterobacteria \"Photorhabdus luminescens\" has been determined (figure 1). These data reveal that the MACPF domain is homologous to pore forming cholesterol dependent cytolysins (CDC's) from gram-positive pathogenic bacteria such as \"Clostridium perfringens\" (which causes gas gangrene). The amino acid sequence identity between the two families is extremely low, and the relationship is not detectable using conventional sequence based data mining techniques.\n\nIt is suggested that MACPF proteins and CDCs form pores in the same way (figure 1). Specifically it is hypothesised that MACPF proteins oligomerise to form a large circular pore (figure 2). A concerted conformational change within each monomer then results in two α-helical regions unwinding to form four amphipathic β-strands that span the membrane of the target cell. Like CDC's MACPF proteins are thus β-pore forming toxins that act like a molecular hole punch.\n\nOther crystal structures for members of the MACPF superfamily can be found in RCSB: i.e., , , , , \n\nComplement regulatory proteins such as CD59 function as MAC inhibitors and prevent inappropriate activity of complement against self cells (Figure 3). Biochemical studies have revealed the peptide sequences in C8α and C9 that bind to CD59. Analysis of the MACPF domain structures reveals that these sequences map to the second cluster of helices that unfurl to span the membrane. It is therefore suggested that CD59 directly inhibits the MAC by interfering with conformational change in one of the membrane spanning regions.\n\nOther proteins that bind to the MAC include C8γ. This protein belongs to the lipocalin family and interacts with C8α. The binding site on C8α is known, however, the precise role of C8γ in the MAC remains to be understood.\n\nDeficiency of C9, or other components of the MAC results in an increased susceptibility to diseases caused by gram-negative bacteria such as meningococcal meningitis. Overactivity of MACPF proteins can also cause disease. Most notably, deficiency of the MAC inhibitor CD59 results in an overactivity of complement and Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria.\n\nPerforin deficiency results in the commonly fatal disorder familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (FHL or HLH). This disease is characterised by an overactivation of lymphocytes which results in cytokine mediated organ damage.\n\nThe MACPF protein DBCCR1 may function as a tumor suppressor in bladder cancer.\n\nC6; C7; C8A; C8B; C9; FAM5B; FAM5C; MPEG1;\nPRF1\n", "id": "12936761", "title": "MACPF"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39288495", "text": "Mitochondrial fusion\n\nMitochondria are dynamic organelles with the ability to fuse (fusion) and divide (fission), forming constantly changing tubular networks in most eukaryotic cells. These mitochondrial dynamics are important for the health of the cell, and defects in dynamics lead to genetic disorders. Through fusion, mitochondria can overcome the dangerous consequences of genetic malfunction. The process of mitochondrial fusion involves a variety of proteins that assist the cell throughout the series of events that form this process. \n\nWhen cells experience metabolic or environmental stresses, mitochondrial fusion and fission work to maintain functional mitochondria. An increase in fusion activity leads to mitochondrial elongation, whereas an increase in fission activity results in mitochondrial fragmentation. The components of this process can influence programmed cell death and lead to neurodegenerative disorders such as Parkinson's disease. Such cell death can be caused by disruptions in the process of either fusion or fission. \n\nThe shapes of mitochondria in cells are continually changing via a combination of fission, fusion, and motility. Specifically, fusion assists in modifying stress by integrating the contents of slightly damaged mitochondria as a form of complementation. By enabling genetic complementation, fusion of the mitochondria allows for two mitochondrial genomes with different defects within the same organelle to individually encode what the other lacks. In doing so, these mitochondrial genomes generate all of the necessary components for a functional mitochondrion.\n\nThe combined effects of continuous fusion and fission give rise to mitochondrial networks. The mechanisms of mitochondrial fusion and fission are regulated by proteolysis and posttranslational modifications. The actions of fission, fusion and motility cause the shapes of these double membrane bound subcellular organelles we know as mitochondria to continually alter their shapes. \n\nThe changes in balance between the rates of mitochondrial fission and fusion directly affect the wide range of mitochondrial lengths that can be observed in different cell types. Rapid fission and fusion of the mitochondria in cultured fibroblasts has been shown to promote the redistribution of mitochondrial green fluorescent protein (GFP) from one mitochondrion to all of the other mitochondria. This process can occur in a cell within a time period as short as an hour.\n\nThe significance of mitochondrial fission and fusion is distinct for nonproliferating neurons, which are unable to survive without mitochondrial fission. Such nonproliferating neurons cause two human diseases known as dominant optic atrophy and Charcot Marie Tooth disease type 2A, which are both caused by fusion defects. Though the importance of these processes is evident, it is still unclear why mitochondrial fission and fusion are necessary for nonproliferating cells.\n\nMany gene products that control mitochondrial fusion have been identified, and can be reduced to three core groups which also control mitochondrial fission. These groups of proteins include mitofusins, OPA1/Mgm1, and Drp1/Dnm1. All of these molecules are GTP hydrolyzing proteins (GTPases) that belong to the dynamin family. Mitochondrial dynamics in different cells are understood by the way in which these proteins regulate and bind to each other. These GTPases in control of mitochondrial fusion are well conserved between mammals, flies, and yeast. Mitochondrial fusion mediators differ between the outer and inner membranes of the mitochondria. Specific membrane-anchored dynamin family members mediate fusion between mitochondrial outer membranes known as Mfn1 and Mfn2. These two proteins are mitofusin contained within humans that can alter the morphology of affected mitochondria in over-expressed conditions. However, a single dynamin family member known as OPA1 in mammals mediates fusion between mitochondrial inner membranes. These regulating proteins of mitochondrial fusion are organism-dependent; therefore, in \"Drosophila\" (fruit flies) and yeasts, the process is controlled by the mitochondrial transmembrane GTPase, Fzo. In \"Drosophila\", Fzo is found in postmeiotic spermatids and the dysfunction of this protein results in male sterility. However, a deletion of Fzo1 in budding yeast results in smaller, spherical mitochondria due to the lack of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA).\n\nThe balance between mitochondrial fusion and fission in cells is dictated by the up-and-down regulation of mitofusins, OPA1/Mgm1, and Drp1/Dnm1. Apoptosis, or programmed cell death, begins with the breakdown of mitochondria into smaller pieces. This process results from up-regulation of Drp1/Dnm1 and down-regulation of mitofusins. Later in the apoptosis cycle, an alteration of OPA1/Mgm1 activity within the inner mitochondrial membrane occurs. The role of the OPA1 protein is to protect cells against apoptosis by inhibiting the release of cytochrome c. Once this protein is altered, there is a change in the cristae structure, release of cytochrome c, and the activation of the destructive caspase enzymes. These resulting changes indicate that inner mitochondrial membrane structure is linked with regulatory pathways in influencing cell life and death. OPA1 plays both a genetic and molecular role in mitochondrial fusion and in cristae remodeling during apoptosis. OPA1 exists in two forms; the first being soluble and found in the intermembrane space, and the second as an integral inner membrane form, work together to restructure and shape the cristae during and after apoptosis. OPA1 blocks intramitochondrial cytochrome c redistribution which proceeds remodeling of the cristae. OPA1 functions to protect cells with mitochondrial dysfunction due to Mfn deficiencies, doubly for those lacking Mfn1 and Mfn2, but it plays a greater role in cells with only Mfn1 deficiencies as opposed to Mfn2 deficiencies. Therefore, it is supported that OPA1 function is dependent on the amount of Mfn1 present in the cell to promote mitochondrial elongation.\n\nBoth proteins, Mfn1 and Mfn2, can act either together or separately during mitochondrial fusion. Mfn1 and Mfn2 are 81% similar to each other and about 51% similar to the \"Drosophila\" protein Fzo. Results published for a study to determine the impact of fusion on mitochondrial structure revealed that Mfn-deficient cells demonstrated either elongated cells (majority) or small, spherical cells upon observation.\n\nThe Mfn protein has three different methods of action: Mfn1 homotypic oligomers, Mfn2 homotypic oligomers and Mfn1-Mfn2 heterotypic oligomers. It has been suggested that the type of cell determines the method of action but it has yet to be concluded whether or not Mfn1 and Mfn2 perform the same function in the process or if they are separate. Cells lacking this protein are subject to severe cellular defects such as poor cell growth, heterogeneity of mitochondrial membrane potential and decreased cellular respiration.\n\nMitochondrial fusion plays an important role in the process of embroygenesis, as shown through the Mfn1 and Mfn2 proteins. Using Mfn1 and Mfn2 knock-out mice, which die in utero at midgestation due to a placental deficiency, mitochondrial fusion was shown not to be essential for cell survival in vitro, but necessary for embryonic development and cell survival throughout later stages of development. Mfn1 Mfn2 double knock-out mice, which die even earlier in development, were distinguished from the \"single\" knock-out mice. Mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs) originated from the double knock-out mice, which do survive in culture even though there is a complete absence of fusion, but parts of their mitochondria show a reduced mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy number and lose membrane potential. This series of events causes problems with adenosine triphosphate (ATP) synthesis.\n\nThe Mitochondrial Inner/Outer Membrane Fusion (MMF) Family (TC# 9.B.25) is a family of proteins that play a role in mitochondrial fusion events. This family belongs to the larger Mitochondrial Carrier (MC) Superfamily. The dynamic nature of mitochondria is critical for function. Chen and Chan (2010) have discussed the molecular basis of mitochondrial fusion, its protective role in neurodegeneration, and its importance in cellular function. The mammalian mitofusins Mfn1 and Mfn2, GTPases localized to the outer membrane, mediate outer-membrane fusion. OPA1, a GTPase associated with the inner membrane, mediates subsequent inner-membrane fusion. Mutations in Mfn2 or OPA1 cause neurodegenerative diseases. Mitochondrial fusion enables content mixing within a mitochondrial population, thereby preventing permanent loss of essential components. Cells with reduced mitochondrial fusion show a subpopulation of mitochondria that lack mtDNA nucleoids. Such mtDNA defects lead to respiration-deficient mitochondria, and their accumulation in neurons leads to impaired outgrowth of cellular processes and consequent neurodegeneration.\n\nA representative list of the proteins belonging to the MMF family is available in the Transporter Classification Database.\n\nMfn1 and Mfn2 (TC# 9.B.25.2.1; Q8IWA4 and O95140, respectively), in mammalian cells are required for mitochondrial fusion, Mfn1 and Mfn2 possess functional distinctions. For instance, the formation of tethered structures \"in vitro\" occurs more readily when mitochondria are isolated from cells overexpressing Mfn1 than Mfn2. In addition, Mfn2 specifically has been shown to associate with Bax and Bak (Bcl-2 family, TC#1.A.21), resulting in altered Mfn2 activity, indicating that the mitofusins possess unique functional characteristics. Lipidic holes may open on opposing bilayers as intermediates, and fusion in cardiac myocytes is coupled with outer mitochondrial membrane destabilization that is opportunistically employed during the mitochondrial permeability transition.\n\nMutations in Mfn2 (but not Mfn1) result in the neurological disorder Charcot-Marie-Tooth syndrome. These mutations can be complemented by the formation of Mfn1–Mfn2 hetero-oligomers but not homo-oligomers of Mfn2–Mfn2 This suggests that within the Mfn1–Mfn2 hetero-oligomeric complex, each molecule is functionally distinct. This suggests that control of the expression levels of each protein likely represents the most basic form of regulation to alter mitochondrial dynamics in mammalian tissues. Indeed, the expression levels of Mfn1 and Mfn2 vary according to cell or tissue type as does the mitochondrial morphology.\n\nIn yeast, three proteins are essential for mitochondrial fusion. Fzo1 (P38297) and Mgm1 (P32266) are conserved guanosine triphosphatases that reside in the outer and inner membranes, respectively. At each membrane, these conserved proteins are required for the distinct steps of membrane tethering and lipid mixing. The third essential component is Ugo1, an outer membrane protein with a region homologous to but distantly related to a region in the Mitochondrial Carrier (MC) family. Hoppins \"et al.\", 2009 showed that Ugo1 is a modified member of this family, containing three transmembrane domains and existing as a dimer, a structure that is critical for the fusion function of Ugo1. Their analyses of Ugo1 indicate that it is required for both outer and inner membrane fusion after membrane tethering, indicating that it operates at the lipid-mixing step of fusion. This role is distinct from the fusion dynamin-related proteins and thus demonstrates that at each membrane, a single fusion protein is not sufficient to drive the lipid-mixing step. Instead, this step requires a more complex assembly of proteins. The formation of a fusion pore has not yet been demonstrated. The Ugo1 protein is a member of the MC superfamily.\n\n", "id": "39288495", "title": "Mitochondrial fusion"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49557171", "text": "Tellurium ion resistance\n\nThe Tellurium Ion Resistance (TerC) Family (TC# 2.A.109) is part of the Lysine Exporter (LysE) Superfamily. A representative list of proteins belonging to the TerC family can be found in the Transporter Classification Database.\n\nThe TerC family (Pfam 03741) includes the \"E. coli\" TerC protein (TC# 2.A.109.1.1) which has been implicated in tellurium resistance. It is hypothesized to catalyze efflux of tellurium ions. TerC is encoded by plasmid pTE53 from a clinical isolate of \"E. coli.\" It has 346 amino acyl residues (aas) and 9 putative transmembrane segments (TMSs) with a large hydrophilic loop between TMSs 5 and 6.\n\nA homologue in \"Arabidopsis thaliana\" (TC# 9.A.30.2.1) may function in prothylakoid membrane biogenises during early chloroplast development. It has 384 aas and 7-8 putative TMSs. In \"E. coli\", TerC forms a membrane complex with TerB as well as DctA, PspA, HslU, and RplK. The TerB/TerC complex may link different functional modules with biochemical activities of C4-dicarboxylate transport, inner membrane stress response (phage shock protein regulatory complex), ATPase/chaperone activity, and proteosynthesis. It may be part of a metal sensing stress response system. The co-presence of TerC and TerE but not TerF correlates with tellurite resistance when several hundred bacterial strains were assayed.\n\nThe reaction proposed to be catalyzed by TerC is:\n\ntellurium ions (in) → tellurium ions (out).\n\n\n", "id": "49557171", "title": "Tellurium ion resistance"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49557494", "text": "Peptidoglycolipid addressing protein\n\nThe Peptidoglycolipid Addressing Protein (GAP) Family is a member of the Lysine Exporter (LysE) Superfamily. It is listed as item 2.A.116 in the Transporter Classification Database.The mechanism of its action is not known, but this family has been shown to be a member of the LsyE superfamily. Therefore, these proteins are most likely secondary carriers.\n\nThe proposed generalized reaction catalyzed by members of the GAP family is:\n\nPGL (in) → PGL (outer membrane).\n\n\n", "id": "49557494", "title": "Peptidoglycolipid addressing protein"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49601697", "text": "NicO transporters\n\nThe Nickel/Cobalt Transporter (NicO) Family (TC# 2.A.113) is a member of the Lysine Exporter (LysE) Superfamily. A representative list of proteins belonging to the NicO family can be found in the Transporter Classification Database.\n\nHomologues of the NicO family have differing predicted topologies: 6, 7 and 8 TMSs. One such homologue, RcnA (YohM; TC# 2.A.113.1.1) of \"E. coli\" (274 aas) has 6 putative transmembrane segments (TMSs) in a 3 + 3 arrangement with a large hydrophilic loop between putativeTMSs 3 and 4. Several homologues of RcnA (e.g., RcnA homologue from \"Ralstonia solanacearum\"; TC# 2.A.113.1.3; CAD17703) have 7 putative TMSs (4 + 3). Still another homologue, UreH of \"Methanocaldococcus janaschii\" (TC# 2.A.113.1.4) has 6 putative TMSs in a more characteristic 3 + 3 TMS arrangement. The NicO family within the LysE superfamily may have a common origin with the TOG superfamily, having lost TMSs 1 and 4 in the 8 TMS TOG superfamily topology.\n\nThis protein is believed to catalyze Co and Ni efflux.\n\nThe overall reaction catalyzed by proteins of the NicO family is probably:\n\n[Ni or Co] (in) → [Ni or Co] (out).\n\n\n", "id": "49601697", "title": "NicO transporters"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49625940", "text": "Sodium-proton antiporter\n\nSodium/proton antiporters are essential secondary-active transporters for sodium and pH homeostasis. Defects in sodium/proton antiporters may result in heart or kidney failure.\nThere are several families of sodium/proton antiporters that facilitate the exchange of sodium ions with protons across the lipid membrane. Some of them include:\n", "id": "49625940", "title": "Sodium-proton antiporter"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49633163", "text": "P-Aminobenzoyl-glutamate transporter\n\nThe \"p\"-aminobenzoyl-glutamate transporter (AbgT) family (TC# 2.A.68) is a family of transporter proteins belonging to the ion transporter (IT) superfamily. The AbgT family consists of the AbgT (YdaH; TC# 2.A.68.1.1) protein of \"E. coli\" and the MtrF drug exporter (TC# 2.A.68.1.2) of \"Neisseria gonorrhoeae\". The former protein is apparently cryptic in wild-type cells, but when expressed on a high copy number plasmid, or when expressed at higher levels due to mutation, it appeared to allow uptake (\"K\" = 123 nM; see Michaelis–Menten kinetics) and subsequent utilization of \"p\"-aminobenzoyl-glutamate as a source of \"p\"-aminobenzoate for \"p\"-aminobenzoate auxotrophs. \"p\"-Aminobenzoate is a constituent of and a precursor for the biosynthesis of folic acid. MtrF was annotated as a putative drug efflux pump.\n\nAbgT is 510 amino acyl residues long and has 12-13 putative transmembrane α-helical spanners (TMSs). MtrF is 522 aas long and has 11 or 12 putative TMSs. The 3-d structures of MtrF and a YdaH homologue have been solved, and functional studies show that it is a drug exporter. The 3-d structure shows that it has 9 TMSs with hairpin entry loops.\n\nCrystal Structures:\n\nThe \"abgT\" gene is preceded by two genes, \"abgA\" and \"abgB,\" which code for homologous amino acyl amino hydrolases and hydrolyze \"p\"-aminobenzoyl glutamate to \"p\"-aminobenzoate and glutamate. Because of the structural similarity of \"p\"-aminobenzoyl-glutatmate to peptides, and the enzymatic activities of the \"abgA\" and \"abgB\" gene products, it has been suggested that AbgT is also a peptide transporter. Demonstration of an energy requirement suggested an H-dependent mechanism. Expression of these genes is regulated by AbgR and an unknown effector.\n\nAs noted above, the AbgT family of transporters has been thought to contribute to bacterial folate biosynthesis by importing the catabolite \"p\"-aminobenzoyl-glutamate for producing folate. Approximately 13,000 putative family members were identified in 2015. The X-ray structures of the full-length \"Alcanivorax borkumensis\" YdaH (AbgT) and \"Neisseria gonorrhoeae\" MtrF proteins. The structures revealed that these two transporters assemble as dimers with architectures distinct from all other families of transporters for which 3-d structures were available. Both YdaH and MtrF are bowl-shaped dimers with a solvent-filled basin extending from the cytoplasm halfway across the membrane bilayer. The protomers of YdaH and MtrF contain nine transmembrane helices and two hairpins which suggested a plausible pathway for substrate transport. A combination of the crystal structure, genetic analyses and substrate accumulation assays indicated that both YdaH and MtrF behave as exporters, capable of removing the folate metabolite \"p\"-aminobenzoic acid from bacterial cells. In fact, it was shown that both YdaH and MtrF participate as antibiotic efflux pumps, mediating bacterial resistance to sulfonamide antimetabolite drugs. Possibly, many AbgT-family transporters act as exporters, conferring resistance to sulfonamides.\n\nThe generalized transport reaction initially proposed for AbgT is:\"p\"-aminobenzoyl-glutamate (out) + nH (out) → \"p\"-aminobenzoyl-glutamate (in) + nH (in)but the more recently proposed transport reaction is:Sulfonamide drugs (in) + H (out) → Sulfonamide drugs (out) + H (in)\n\n", "id": "49633163", "title": "P-Aminobenzoyl-glutamate transporter"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49733889", "text": "CitMHS family\n\nThe Citrate-Mg:H (CitM) / Citrate-Ca:H (CitH) Symporter (CitMHS) Family (TC# 2.A.11) is a family of transport proteins belonging to the Ion transporter superfamily. Members of this family are found in Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria, archaea and possibly eukaryotes. These proteins all probably arose by an internal gene duplication event. Lensbouer & Doyle (2010) have reviewed these systems, classifying the porters with three superfamilies, according to ion-preference:\n\n1) Mg-preferring,\n\n2) Ca-preferring, and\n\n3) Fe-preferring.\n\nA representative list of proteins belonging to the CitMHS family can be found in the Transporter Classification Database.\n\nTwo of the characterized members of the CitMHS family, both citrate uptake permeases from \"Bacillus subtilis\", are CitM (TC# 2.A.11.1.1) and CitH (TC# 2.A.11.1.2)\".\"\n\nCitM is believed to transport a citrate-Mgcomplex in symport with one H per Mg-citrate while CitH apparently transports a citrate-Ca complex in symport with protons. The cation specificity of CitM is: Mg, Mn, Ba, Ni, Co, Ca and Zn, in this preferential order. CitM is highly specific for citrate and D-isocitrate and does not transport other di- and tri-carboxylates including succinate, L-isocitrate, cis-aconitate and tricarballylate. For CitH, the cation specificity (in order of preference) is: Ca, Ba and Sr. The two proteins are 60% identical, contain about 400 amino acyl residues and possess twelve putative transmembrane spanners. A CitM homologue in \"S. mutans\" transports citrate conjugated to Fe or Mn but not Ca, Mg or Ni.\n\nThe transport reactions catalyzed by (1) CitM and (2) CitH, respectively, are:\n\n", "id": "49733889", "title": "CitMHS family"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49780148", "text": "MatC family\n\nThe Malonate Uptake (MatC) family (TC# 2.A.101) is a constituent of the ion transporter (IT) superfamily. It consists of proteins from Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria (e.g., Xanthomonas, Rhizobium and Streptomyces species), simple eukaryotes (e.g., \"Chlamydomonas reinhardtii\") and archaea (e.g., \"Methanococcus jannaschii\"). The proteins are of about 450 amino acyl residues in length with 12-14 putative transmembrane segments (TMSs). Closest functionally-characterized homologues are in the DASS (TC #2.A.47) family. One member of this family is a putative malonate transporter (MatC of \"Rhizobium leguminosarum\" bv \"trifolii\", TC# 2.A.101.1.2).\n\n\n", "id": "49780148", "title": "MatC family"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49780593", "text": "Basic amino acid antiporter family\n\nThe Basic Amino Acid Antiporter (ArcD) family (TC# 2.A.118) is a constituent of the IT superfamily. This family consists of proteins from Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria (e.g., \"Streptococcus\", \"Escherichia\", \"Salmonella\", \"Fusobacterium\" and \"Borrelia\" species). The proteins are of about 480 amino acyl residues (aas) in length and have 10-12 putative transmembrane segments (TMSs). Functionally characterized homologues are in the DcuC (TC #2.A.61) and ArsB (TC #2.A.4) families. Some members of the family probably catalyze arginine/ornithine or citruline/ornithine antiport.\n\n", "id": "49780593", "title": "Basic amino acid antiporter family"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49781126", "text": "NhaA family\n\nNa/H antiporter A (NhaA) family (TC# 2.A.33) contains a number of bacterial sodium-proton antiporter (SPAP) proteins. These are integral membrane proteins that catalyse the exchange of H for Na in a manner that is highly pH dependent. Homologues have been sequenced from a number of bacteria and archaea. Prokaryotes possess multiple paralogues. A representative list of the proteins that belong to the NhaA family can be found in the Transporter Classification Database.\n\nProteins of the NhaA family are of 300-700 amino acyl residues in length. NhaA of \"E. coli\" is a homeodimer, each subunit consisting of a bundle of 12 tilted transmembrane α-helices (TMSs).\n\nMolecular dynamics simulations of NhaA enabled proposal of an atomically detailed model of antiporter function. Three conserved aspartate residues are key to this proposed mechanism: Asp (D164) is the Na-binding site, D163 controls the alternating accessibility of this binding site to the cytoplasm or periplasm, and D133 is crucial for pH regulation.\n\nNa-H antiporters are integral membrane proteins that exchange Na for H across the cytoplasmic membrane and many intracellular membranes. They are essential for Na, pH, and volume homeostasis, which are processes crucial for cell viability. The \"E. coli\" protein probably functions in the regulation of the internal pH when the external pH is alkaline, and the protein effectively functions as a pH sensor. It also uses the H gradient to expel Na from the cell. Its activity is highly pH dependent.\n\nThe generalized transport reaction catalyzed by NhaA is:Na (in) + 2H (out) ⇌ Na (out) + 2H (in).\n\n\n", "id": "49781126", "title": "NhaA family"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49781138", "text": "NhaB family\n\nThe NhaB family (TC# 2.A.34) belongs to the Ion Transporter (IT) Superfamily. A representative list of proteins belonging to the NhaB family can be found in the Transporter Classification Database.\n\nNhaB homologues are usually about 500 amino acyl residues (aas) in length and possess about 12 transmembrane α-helical spanners (TMSs), although some members differ in their number of TMSs. NhaB homologues also exhibit a region with limited sequence similarity to a 46 kDa membrane protein of unknown function from \"Mycobacterium leprae\" (spP46838) which is also homologous to a member of arsenate resistance pumps of bacteria, archaea and eukaryotes (TC# 3.A.4). Only Gram-negative bacterial proteins have been functionally characterized.\n\nThe \"E. coli\" NhaB is 58% identical to the orthologous \"Vibrio alginolyticus\" Na/H antiporter. Although the latter protein is predicted to exhibit 10 TMSs, construction of \"NhaB-phoA\" fusions led to evidence for a 9 TMS model with the N-terminus in the cytoplasm and the C-terminus in the periplasm. A centrally located aspartyl residue in the 3rd TMS is conserved in all members of the family and important for activity.\n\nThe generalized transport reaction catalyzed by NhaB of \"E. coli\" is:2 Na (in) + 3 H (out) ⇌ 2 Na (out) + 3 H (in).\n\n", "id": "49781138", "title": "NhaB family"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49781596", "text": "NhaC family\n\nThe NhaC family (TC# 2.A.35) belongs to the Ion Transporter (IT) Superfamily. A representative list of proteins belonging to the NhaC family can be found in the Transporter Classification Database.\n\nTwo members of the NhaC family have been functionally characterized. One is believed to be a Na:H antiporter; the other is a malate·H:lactate·Na antiporter. Several paralogues are found in \"Vibrio cholerae,\" and two paralogues are found encoded in the completely sequenced genomes of both\"Haemophilus influenzae\" and \"Bacillus subtilis.\" \"E. coli\" lacks such a homologue. \"Pyrococcus\" species also have at least one homologue each. Thus, members of the NhaC family are found in both Gram-negative bacteria and Gram-positive bacteria as well as archaea. NhaC of \"B. firmus\" is 462 amino acyl residues long and possesses 12 putative transmembrane α-helical segments. MleN of \"B. subtilis\" (468 aas; TC# 2.A.35.1.2) also exhibits 12 putative TMSs.\n\nThe transport reaction catalyzed by NhaC is probably:Na+ (in) + nH+ (out) ⇌ Na+ (out) + nH+ (in). (n > 1)That catalyzed by MleN is probably:Malate (out) + H (out) + Lactate (in) + Na (in) ⇌ Malate (in) + H (in) + Lactate (out) + Na (out)\n\n\n", "id": "49781596", "title": "NhaC family"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49781600", "text": "NhaD family\n\nThe NhaD family (TC# 2.A.62) belongs to the Ion Transporter (IT) Superfamily. A representative list of proteins belonging to the NhaD family can be found in the Transporter Classification Database.\n\nThe NhaD Na/H antiporter has been characterized from two \"Vibrio\" species: \"V. parahaemolyticus\" and \"V. cholerae\" and in the haloalkaliphile, \"Alkalimonas amylolytica\". These proteins and their homologues are 400-500 aas long and exhibit 10-13 TMSs. They catalyze Na/H and Li/H antiport. They exhibit activity at basic pH (8-10) with no activity at pH 7.5. The \"Amylolytica\" antiporter has low Na affinity and has optimal activity at 600 mM Na. Homologues are found in proteobacteria of all groups, \"Flavobacteria\" and \"Chlamydia.\" Distant homologues of the IT superfamily are ubiquitous.\n\nThe generalized reaction catalyzed by NhaD is:nH (in) + mNa (out) ⇌ nH (out) + mNa (in).\n\n\n", "id": "49781600", "title": "NhaD family"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49781605", "text": "NhaE family\n\nThe NhaE family (TC# 2.A.111) belongs to the Ion Transporter (IT) Superfamily. A representative list of proteins belonging to the NhaE family can be found in the Transporter Classification Database.\n\nThe NhaH family consists of proteins from Gram-negative bacteria (e.g., \"Leptospira\", \"Azotobacter\", \"Neisseria\", \"Ralstonia\", \"Chlorobium\" and \"Rhizobial\" species). The proteins are of about 480 aas with 12-14 putative TMSs.\n\nAn open reading frame (ORF) from the genome of \"Neisseria meningitidis\" displaying similarity with the NhaE type of Na/H antiporters was expressed in \"E. coli\" and characterized for sodium transport ability. The \"N. meningitidis\" antiporter (NmNhaE) was able to complement an \"E. coli\" strain devoid of Na/H antiporters (KNabc) with respect to the ability to grow in the presence of high concentrations of NaCl or LiCl. Ion transport assays in everted vesicles prepared from the KNabc strain expressing NmNhaE from a plasmid confirmed its ability to translocate Na and Li.\n\nThe generalized reaction catalyzed by NhaE is,Na or Li (in) + H (out) ⇌ Na or Li (out) + H (in)\n\n", "id": "49781605", "title": "NhaE family"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49810360", "text": "Monovalent cation:proton antiporter-1\n\nThe Monovalent Cation:Proton Antiporter-1 (CPA1) Family (TC# 2.A.36) is a large family of proteins derived from Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria, blue-green bacteria, archaea, yeast, plants and animals. The CPA1 family belongs to the VIC superfamily. Transporters from eukaryotes have been functionally characterized to catalyze Na:H exchange. Their primary physiological functions are thought to be in (1) cytoplasmic pH regulation, extruding the H generated during metabolism, and (2) salt tolerance (in plants), due to Na uptake into vacuoles. Bacterial homologues have also been found to facilitate Na:H antiport, but some also catalyze Li:H antiport or Ca:H antiport under certain conditions.\n\nThe phylogenetic tree for the CPA1 family shows three principal clusters. The first cluster includes proteins derived exclusively from animals, and all of the functionally characterized members of the family belong to this cluster. Of the two remaining clusters, one includes all bacterial homologues while the other includes one from \"Arabidopsis thaliana,\" one from \"Homo sapiens\" and two from yeast (\"S. cerevisiae\" and \"S. pombe\"). Several organisms possess multiple paralogues; for example, seven paralogues are found in \"C. elegans,\" and five are known in humans. Most of these paralogues are very similar in sequence, and they belong to the animal specific cluster.\n\nA representative list of proteins belonging to the CPA1 family can be found in the Transporter Classification Database.\n\nNumerous members of the CPA1 family have been sequenced, and these proteins vary substantially in size. The bacterial proteins have 520-550 amino acyl residues (aas) while eukaryotic proteins are generally larger, varying in size from 540-900 residues. They exhibit 10-12 putative transmembrane α-helical spanners (TMSs). A proposed topological model suggests that in addition to 12 TMSs, a region between TMSs 9 and 10 dips into the membrane to line the pore. However, one homologue, Nhx1 of \"S. cerevisiae\" (TC# 2.A.36.1.12)\",\" has an extracellular glycosylated C-terminus.\n\nUsing the mammalian NHE1 (TC# 2.A.36.1.1), it has been found that TMSs 4 and 9 as well as the extracellular loop between TMSs 3 and 4 are important for drug (amiloride- and benzoyl guanidinium-based derivatives) sensitivities. Mutations in these regions also affect transport activities. M4 and M9 therefore contain critical sites for both drug and cation recognition.\n\nThe generalized transport reaction catalyzed by functionally characterized members of the CPA1 family is:Na (out) + H (in) ⇌ Na (in) + H (out).\n\n\n", "id": "49810360", "title": "Monovalent cation:proton antiporter-1"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49813299", "text": "Monovalent cation:proton antiporter-3\n\nThe Monovalent Cation (K or Na):Proton Antiporter-3 (CPA3) Family (TC# 2.A.63) is a member of the Na transporting Mrp superfamily. The CPA3 family consists of bacterial multicomponent K:H and Na:H antiporters. The best characterized systems are the PhaABCDEFG system of \"Sinorhizobium meliloti\" (TC# 2.A.63.1.1) that functions in pH adaptation and as a K efflux system, and the MnhABCDEFG system of \"Staphylococcus aureus\" (TC# 2.A.63.1.3) that functions as a Na efflux Na:H antiporter.\n\nA homologous, but only partially sequenced, system was earlier reported to catalyze Na:H antiport in an alkalophilic \"Bacillus\" strain. PhaA and PhaD are respectively homologous to the ND5 and ND4 subunits of the H-pumping (TC #3.D.1). Homologous protein subunits from \"E. coli\" NADH:quinone oxidoreductase can functionally replace MrpA and MrpD in \"Bacillus subtilis.\"\n\nHomologues of PhaA, B, C and D and Nha1, 2, 3 and 4 of an alkalophilic \"Bacillus\" strain are the Yuf(Mrp)T, U, V and D genes of \"Bacillus subtilis\". In this system, YufT is believed to be responsible for Na:H antiporter activity, but it does not have activity in the absence of other constituents of the operon.\n\nThe seven Pha proteins are of the following sizes (in #aas) and exhibit the following putative numbers of transmembrane α-helical spanners (TMSs): \nAll are predicted to be integral membrane proteins.\n\nCorresponding values for the \"S. aureus\" Mnh system are: \nIn view of the complexity of the system, large variation in subunit structure, and the homology with NDH family protein constituents, a complicated energy coupling mechanism, possibly involving a redox reaction, cannot be ruled out.\n\nNa or Li does, but K, Ca, and Mg do not, support significant antiport by the Gram-positive bacterial systems (TC# 2.A.6.3.1.2 and TC# 2.A.6.3.1.3). Na(Li)/H antiporters have alkaline pH optima and apparent K values for Na that are among the lowest reported for bacterial Na/H antiporters. Na/Hantiport consumes the pmf and therefore is probably electrogenic.\n\nYufF (MrpF) appears to catalyze cholate efflux, possibly by a Na symport mechanism. It plays a major role in Na extrusion and is required for initiation of sporulation. Additionally, another component of the operon, MrpF (equivalent to PhaF of \"R. meliloti\") has been implicated in choline and Na efflux. The MrpA-G proteins of \"B. subtilis\" have been shown to be present in a single multicomponent complex. They provide Na/H antiport activity and function in multiple compound resistance and pH homeostasis.\n\nThe generalized reaction believed to be catalyzed by CPA3 family members is:[K or Na] (in) + H (out) ⇌ [K or Na] (out) + H (in).\n\n", "id": "49813299", "title": "Monovalent cation:proton antiporter-3"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49861393", "text": "Sequence graph\n\nIn comparative genomics, a sequence graph, also called an alignment graph, breakpoint graph, or adjacency graph, is a bidirected graph in which the vertices represent segments of DNA and the edges represent adjacency between segments in a genome. The segments are labeled by the DNA string they represent, and each edge connects the tail end of one segment with the head end of another segment. Each adjacency edge is labelled by a (possibly empty) string of DNA. Traversing a connected component of segments and adjacency edges (called a \"thread\") yields a sequence, which typically represents a genome or a section of a genome. The segments can be thought of as synteny blocks, with the edges dictating how to arrange these blocks in a particular genome, and the labelling of the adjacency edges representing bases that are not contained in synteny blocks. \n\nSequence graphs can be used to represent multiple sequence alignments with the addition of a new kind of edge representing homology between segments. For a set of genomes, one can create an acyclic breakpoint graph with a thread for each genome. For two segments formula_1 and formula_2, where formula_3,formula_4,formula_5, and formula_6 represent the endpoints of the two segments, homology edges can be created from formula_3 to formula_5 and formula_4 to formula_6 or from formula_3 to formula_6 and formula_4 to formula_5 - representing the two possible orientations of the homology. The advantage of representing a multiple sequence alignment this way is that it is possible to include inversions and other structural rearrangements that wouldn't be allowable in a matrix representation.\nIf there are multiple possible paths when traversing a thread in a sequence graph, multiple sequences can be represented by the same thread. This means it is possible to create a sequence graph that represents a population of individuals with slightly different genomes - with each genome corresponding to one path through the graph. These graphs have been proposed as a replacement for the reference human genome. \n", "id": "49861393", "title": "Sequence graph"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49921046", "text": "H+, Na+-translocating pyrophosphatase family\n\nMembers of the H, Na-translocating Pyrophosphatase (M\"-PPase)\" Family (TC# 3.A.10) are found in the vacuolar (tonoplast) membranes of higher plants, algae, and protozoa, and in both bacteria and archaea. They are therefore ancient enzymes.\n\nFull-length members of the H-PPase family have been sequenced from numerous bacteria, archaea and eukaryotes. These H pumping enzymes, which are probably homodimeric, have been reported to fall into two phylogenetic subfamilies. One subfamily invariably contains a conserved cysteine (Cys) and includes all known K-independent H-PPases, while the other has another conserved cysteine (Cys) but lacks Cys and includes all known K-dependent H-PPases. All H-PPases require Mg, and those from plant vacuoles, acidocalcisomes of protozoa and fermentative bacteria require mM K. Those from respiratory and photosynthetic bacteria as well as archaea are less dependent upon K. However, exceptions may exist. It is not sure whether K is transported.\n\nThe archaeon, \"Methanosarcina\" \"mazei\" Gö1, encodes within its genome two H-translocating pyrophosphatases (PPases), Mvp1 and Mvp2. Mvp1 resembles bacterial PPases while Mvp2 resembles plant PPases. Mvp2 was shown to translocate 1 H per pyrophosphate hydrolyzed.\n\nSome PPases from \"Anaerostipes caccae\", \"Chlorobium limicola\", \"Clostridium tetani\", and \"Desulfuromonas acetoxidans\" have been identified as K-dependent Na transporters. Phylogenetic analysis led to the identification of a monophyletic clade comprising characterized and predicted Na-transporting PPases (Na-PPases) within the K-dependent subfamily. H-transporting PPases (H-PPases) are more heterogeneous and form at least three independent clades in both subfamilies.\n\nThe plant enzymes probably pump one H upon hydrolysis of pyrophosphate, thereby generating a proton motive force, positive and acidic in the tonoplast lumen. They establish a pmf of similar magnitude to that generated by the H-translocating ATPases in the same vacuolar membrane. The bacterial and archaeal proteins may catalyze fully reversible reactions, thus being able to synthesize pyrophosphate when the pmf is sufficient. The enzyme from \"R. rubrum\" contributes to the pmf when light intensity is insufficient to generate a pmf sufficient in magnitude to support rapid ATP synthesis. Both C-termini of the dimeric subunits of V-PPase are on the same side of the membrane, and they are close to each other. Transmembrane domain 6 of vacuolar H-pyrophosphatase appears to mediate both protein targeting and proton transport.\n\nThe generalized transport reaction catalyzed by H-PPases is:pyrophosphate (P) + HO + H (cytoplasm) → inorganic phosphate (2 P) + H (external milieu or vacuolar lumen).\n\nEukaryotic members of the H-PPase family are large proteins of about 770 amino acyl residues (aas) with fifteen or sixteen putative transmembrane α-helical spanners (TMSs). The N-termini are predicted to be in the vacuolar lumen while the C-termini are thought to be in the cytoplasm. These proteins exhibit a region that shows convincing sequence similarity to the regions surrounding the DCCD-sensitive glutamate in the C-terminal regions of the c-subunits of F-type ATPases (TC #3.A.2). The H-pyrophosphatase of \"Streptomyces coelicolor\" has been shown to have a 17 TMS topology with the substrate binding domain exposed to the cytoplasm. The C-terminus is hydrophilic with a single C-terminal TMS. The basic structure is believed to have 16 TMSs with several large cytoplasmic loops containing functional motifs. Several acidic residues in the \"Arabidopsis\" H-PPase have been shown to be important for function. Some plants possess closely related H-PPase isoforms. These enzymes have the enzyme commission number EC 3.6.1.1.\n\nLin et al. (2012) reported the crystal structure of a \"Vigna radiata\" H-PPase (VrH-PPase) in complex with a non-hydrolysable substrate analogue, imidodiphosphate (IDP), at 2.35 Å resolution. Each VrH-PPase subunit consists of an integral membrane domain formed by 16 transmembrane helices. IDP is bound in the cytosolic region of each subunit and trapped by numerous charged residues and five Mg ions. A previously undescribed proton translocation pathway is formed by six core transmembrane helices. Proton pumping can be initialized by PP(i) hydrolysis, and H is then transported into the vacuolar lumen through a pathway consisting of Arg 242, Asp 294, Lys 742 and Glu 301. Lin et al. (2012) proposed a working model of the mechanism for the coupling between proton pumping and PP(i) hydrolysis by H-PPases. Membrane-integral pyrophosphatases (M-PPases) are crucial for the survival of plants, bacteria, and protozoan parasites. They couple pyrophosphate hydrolysis or synthesis to Na or H pumping. The 2.6Å structure of \"Thermotoga maritima\" H-PPase in the resting state revealed a previously unknown solution for ion pumping. The hydrolytic center, 20 angstroms above the membrane, is coupled to the gate formed by the conserved Asp(243), Glu(246), and Lys(707) by an unusual 'coupling funnel' of six α helices. Helix 12 slides down upon substrate binding to open the gate by a simple binding-change mechanism. Below the gate, four helices form the exit channel. Superimposing helices 3 to 6, 9 to 12, and 13 to 16 suggests that M-PPases arose through gene triplication. By comparing the active sites, fluoride inhibition data and the various models for ion transport, Kajander et al. concluded that membrane-integral PPases probably use binding of pyrophosphate to drive pumping.\n\n", "id": "49921046", "title": "H+, Na+-translocating pyrophosphatase family"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20097070", "text": "Sessility (motility)\n\nIn biology, sessility (in the sense of positional movement or \"motility\") refers to organisms that do not possess a means of self-locomotion and are normally immobile. This is distinct from the second meaning of sessility which refers to an organism or biological structure attached directly by its base without a stalk.\n\nSessile organisms can move through outside sources (such as water currents) but are usually permanently attached to something. Organisms such as corals lay down their own substrate from which they grow. Other organisms grow from a solid such as a rock, dead tree trunk, or a manmade object such as a buoy or ship's hull.\n\nSessile animals typically have a motile phase in their development. Sponges have a motile larval stage, which becomes sessile at maturity. In contrast, many jellyfish develop as sessile polyps early in their life cycle. In the case of the cochineal, it is in the nymph stage (also called the crawler stage) that the cochineal disperses. The juveniles move to a feeding spot and produce long wax filaments. Later they move to the edge of the cactus pad where the wind catches the wax filaments and carries the tiny larval cochineals to a new host.\n\nMany sessile animals, including sponges, corals and hydra, are capable of asexual reproduction \"in situ\" by the process of budding. Sessile organisms such as barnacles and tunicates need some mechanism to move their young into new territory. This is why the most widely accepted theory explaining the evolution of a larval stage is the need for long-distance dispersal ability. Wayne Sousa's 1979 study in intertidal disturbance added support for the theory of nonequilibrium community structure, “suggesting that open space is necessary for the maintenance of diversity in most communities of sessile organisms.”\n\nClumping is a behavior in sessile organisms, in which individuals of a particular species group closely to one another for beneficial purposes, and can be seen in coral reefs and cochineal populations. This allows for faster reproduction and better protection from predators.\n\nThe circalittoral zone of coastal environments and biomes are dominated by sessile organisms such as oysters. Carbonate platforms grow due to the buildup of skeletal remains of sessile organisms, usually microorganisms, which induce carbonate precipitation through their metabolism. \n\nIn anatomy and botany, \"sessility\" refers to an organism or biological structure that has no \"peduncle\" or stalk. See Peduncle (anatomy), Peduncle (botany) and Sessility (botany). A sessile structure has no stalk.\n\n", "id": "20097070", "title": "Sessility (motility)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49516442", "text": "Phylogenetic inertia\n\nPhylogenetic inertia or phylogenetic constraint refers to the limitations on the future evolutionary pathways that have been imposed by previous adaptations.\n\nCharles Darwin first recognized this phenomenon, though the term was later coined by Huber in 1939. Darwin explained the idea of phylogenetic inertia based on his observations; he spoke about it when explaining the \"Law of Conditions of Existence\". Darwin also suggested that, after speciation, the organisms do not start over from scratch, but have characteristics that are built upon already existing ones that were inherited from their ancestors; and these characteristics likely limit the amount of evolution seen in that new taxa. This is the main concept of phylogenetic inertia.\n\nRichard Dawkins also explained these constraints by likening natural selection to a river in his 1982 book \"The Extended Phenotype\".\n\n\nBirds are the only speciose group of vertebrates that are exclusively oviparous, or egg laying. It has been suggested that birds are phylogenetically constrained, as being derived from reptiles, and likely have not overcome this constraint or diverged far enough away to develop viviparity, or live birth.\n\n\n\nThere have been several studies that have been able to effectively test for phylogenetic inertia when looking into shared traits; predominantly with a comparative methods approach. Some have used comparative methods and found evidence for certain traits attributed to adaptation, and some to phylogeny; there were also numerous traits that could be attributed to both. Another study developed a new method of comparative examination that showed to be a powerful predictor of phylogenetic inertia in a variety of situations. It was called Phylogenetic Eigenvector Regression (PVR), which runs principal component analyses between species on a pairwise phylogenetic distance matrix. In another, different study, the authors described methods for measuring phylogenetic inertia, looked at effectiveness of various comparative methods, and found that different methods can reveal different aspects of drivers. Autoregression and PVR showed good results with morphological traits.\n", "id": "49516442", "title": "Phylogenetic inertia"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50349553", "text": "FAM63B\n\nFAM63B is a protein which in humans is encoded by the gene FAM63B. This gene is highly expressed in humans. The FAM63B gene is also highly conserved throughout evolutionary history. The discovered function of FAM63B is an interaction with the kinesin-1 light chain and the transportation of vaccinia virus from the nucleus to the cell periphery.\n\nFAM63B is located at 15q21.3-q22.1, spanning 90,707 base pairs on chromosome 15.\n\nThe full name of FAM63B is family with sequence similarity 63, member B. FAM63B is also listed by its alias, KIAA1164, in some publications.\n\nThe FAM63B gene encodes a primary transcript that can be alternatively spliced into 9 protein variants. FAM63B variant a is the most common isoform found in humans.\n\nFAM63B is a member of the Pfam super family, and contains a domain of unknown function (DUF544) that is homologous within the protein family. FAM63B protein variant an also contains a bipartite tryptophan binding motif from W476 to W533. Variant a of the protein also contains a hydrophobic stretch of alanine from 567 to 574 and a mixed charge sequence from residue 598 to 617. FAM63B protein may contain a signal sequence specifying return to the endoplasmic reticulum (KDEL) from residue 607 to 621 in variant a.\n\nThe secondary structure of FAM63B is a combination of coils, some α-helices, and few β-sheets. The Phyre 2 program predicts α-helices in 23% of the protein, β-strands in 9% of the protein, and the remaining 59% of the protein as disordered. The disordered regions coincide with the coiled regions predicted by other programs, and this results in the long stretch of coiled protein beginning at the N-terminus. According to the SOUSI program, there is a 16-amino acid-long span from residues 265 to 280 of FAM63B that could be a transmembrane sequence. However, transmembrane sequences generally need to be at least 20 amino acids long in order to be stable in the membrane, so a transmembrane sequence is unlikely. Therefore, FAM63B is not fixed in the membrane of any organelle and is free to move through the cell and between organelles.\n\nNot much is known about the tertiary structure of FAM63B. A predicted folding is shown.\nPost-translational modifications of the FAM63B protein.\nFAM63B has predicted NES (nuclear export signals) at Val274 and Leu277. Also, a NLS (nuclear localization signal) is predicted for FAM63B at RKRK at residue 599. In agreement, Reinhardt’s method for cytoplasmic/nuclear discrimination predicts FAM63B to be located in the nucleus with a reliability of 76.7%. The presence of both NLS and NES signals and O-GlcNAc post-translational modification of FAM63B supports the protein's location in both the nucleus and cytoplasm and the discovered protein function as a shuttle for vaccinia virus between the nucleus and the cell periphery.\n\nFAM63B has moderately-high to high expression and is constitutively expressed. FAM63B is likely ubiquitously expressed in humans.\n\nExpression of FAM63B is high in the embryonic stem cells and differentiated tissues but low or off in embryoid bodies and other progenitor cells, such as the multipotent mesenchymal stem cells. It is likely that FAM63B is expressed during pluripotency and unipotency but is not important for differentiation, as is occurring in embryoid bodies, mesenchymal stem cells, and other progenitor cells.\n\nThe promoter of FAM63B is GXP_5885, located on the positive strand of chromosome 15 from (58770692, 58771462) and is 711 base pairs long.\n\nFAM63B is shown to interact with one protein, KLC-1. KLC-1, kinesin light chain 1, is a protein which recruits kinesin-1 via its cargo binding light chain and contains a bipartite tryptophan binding motif. This motif is present in a vaccinia virus integral membrane protein, A36, that is required for transport of the virus from the perinuclear space to the cell periphery. In the absence of A36, proteins with a bipartite tryptophan binding motif can interact with the kinesin light chain, recruit KLC-1, and promote virus transport from the nucleus to the cytoplasm.\n\nThe discovered function of FAM63B protein is a transporter of vaccinia virus in the human genome. FAM63B contains a bipartite tryptophan binding motif between W476 and W533. The motif also contains a Q residue at the +2 position, which was found to be a frequent occurrence in proteins that bind KLC-1 or KLC-2. FAM63B is among proteins studied that can rescue virus transport to the cell periphery when expressed in A36-deficient cells, successfully replacing the cytoplasmic domain A36 of vaccinia.\n\nThe specific pathology of FAM63B is unknown.\n\nFAM63B is part of four networks regulated by miRNA, three of which are linked to neuronal differentiation and dopaminergic gene expression. These findings indicate that FAM63B could be used as a biomarker for the detection and treatment of schizophrenia. Furthermore, aberrant methylation of FAM63B may play a role in the development of schizophrenia. FAM63B has also been ranked 13 of 25 on a list of associated genes relevant to arthritis.\n\nFAM63B has one paralog, FAM63A, which is a gene of unknown function. FAM63A gene encodes a protein that is 469 amino acids long and 76% similar to FAM63B.\n\nFAM63B has been found in all multicellular and unicellular eukaryotes, including plants but excluding protists and fungi. The gene has also been found in archaea but not bacteria.\nThe most distant homolog of FAM63B is found in \"Thermoplasmatales archaeon\", an archaea that diverged from the human gene 4.25 billion years ago.\n\nFAM63B is a member of the Pfam super family, and contains a domain of unknown function (DUF544) homologous within the protein family. This region of the protein is highly conserved through FAM63B homologs, as is the bipartite tryptophan binding motif of FAM63B and the C-terminus signal sequence.\n\nThe phylogenetic tree below shows a time calibration for the evolution of FAM63B.\n", "id": "50349553", "title": "FAM63B"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50529615", "text": "Merodiploid\n\nMerodiploid is a partially diploid bacterium, which has its own chromosome complement and a chromosome fragment introduced by conjugation, transformation or transduction. It can also be defined as an essentially haploid organism that carries a second copy of a part of its genome.The term is derived from the Greek, meros = part, and was originally used to describe both unstable partial diploidy, such as that which occurs briefly in recipients after mating with an Hfr strain (1), and the stable state, exemplified by F-prime strains (see Hfr’S And F-Primes). Over time the usage has tended to confine the term to descriptions of stable genetic states.\n", "id": "50529615", "title": "Merodiploid"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50550012", "text": "Biological rules\n\nA biological rule or biological law is a generalized law, principle, or rule of thumb formulated to describe patterns observed in living organisms. Biological rules and laws are often developed as succinct, broadly applicable ways to explain complex phenomena or salient observations about the ecology and biogeographical distributions of plant and animal species around the world, though they have been proposed for or extended to all types of organisms. Many of these regularities of ecology and biogeography are named after the biologists who first described them.\n\nFrom the birth of their science, biologists have sought to explain apparent regularities in observational data. In his biology, Aristotle inferred rules governing differences between live-bearing tetrapods (in modern terms, terrestrial placental mammals). Among his rules were that brood size decreases with adult body mass, while lifespan increases with gestation period and with body mass, and fecundity decreases with lifespan. Thus, for example, elephants have smaller and fewer broods than mice, but longer lifespan and gestation. Rules like these concisely organized the sum of knowledge obtained by early scientific measurements of the natural world, and could be used as models to predict future observations.\n\nAmong the earliest biological rules in modern times are those of Karl Ernst von Baer (from 1828 onwards) on embryonic development, and of Constantin Wilhelm Lambert Gloger on animal pigmentation, in 1833.\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\nThere is some scepticism among biogeographers about the usefulness of general rules. For example, J.C. Briggs, in his 1987 book \"Biogeography and Plate Tectonics\", comments that while Willi Hennig's rules on cladistics \"have generally been helpful\", his progression rule is \"suspect\".\n", "id": "50550012", "title": "Biological rules"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50274456", "text": "HUMARA assay\n\nHUMARA Assay is one of the most widely used methods to determine the clonal origin of a tumor. The method is based on X chromosome inactivation and it takes the advantage of having different methylation status of a gene called HUMARA (short for Human Androgen receptor) that is located on X chromosome. Considering the fact that once one X chromosome is inactivated in a cell, all other cells derived from it will have the same X chromosome inactivated, this approach becomes a great tool to differentiate a monoclonal population from a polyclonal one in a female tissue. HUMARA gene, in particular, has three important features that make it highly convenient for the purpose.\n\n1-) The gene is located on X chromosome and it goes through inactivation by methylation in normal embryogenesis of a female infant. The fact that most-but not all-genes on X chromosome undergo inactivation, this feature becomes an important one.\n\n2-) Human Androgen Receptor gene alleles have varying numbers of CAG repeats. Thus, when DNA from a healthy female tissue is amplified by PCR for a specific region of the gene, two separated bands can be seen on the gel.\n\n3-) The region that is amplified by PCR also has certain base orders that make it susceptible to be digested by HpaII (or HhaI) enzyme when it is not methylated. This detail gives the opportunity to researchers to differentiate a methylated allele from the unmethylated one.\n\nThanks to these qualities of HUMARA gene, clonal origin of any tissue from a female mammalian organism can be determined.\n\nThe basic process is performed as the following :\n\n1-) DNA from the tissue is isolated.\n\n2-) The isolated DNA is treated with the suitable enzyme (such as HpaII) in optimal conditions for a suggested amount of time (i.e. overnight).\n\n3-) DNA is cleaned and the certain region of HUMARA gene is amplified by PCR using \"suitable\" primers (as an example, please see:Ref.2)\n\n4-) After running PCR products through a gel, the gel is visualized and the results are analyzed accordingly. If two bands are apparent, the tissue studied is most likely of polyclonal origin. If a single band is observed, the tissue is monoclonal unless two alleles have exactly the same numbers of CAG repeats or different cells with the same inactivated initiated the tumor; so, seemingly monoclonal although it is actually polyclonal.\n\nIn order to make a conclusion about the clonality of a tumor, it is best to use the DNA from a normal tissue of the same person, and a sample without enzyme treatment must also be amplified as a control. If, even in normal tissues without enzyme treatment, a single band is observed, it may be explained as follows; this person has the genetic pattern as XO (this possibility can be excluded to see a band after enzyme treatment because, if indeed XO is the genetic pattern of the sample, then, there will be NO methylation, therefore no band should be visible after digesting with the enzyme. In the case of seeing a band after enzyme treatment, the observation is most likely to mean that the person has two X chromosomes with exact CAG repeats.) When you see two bands for normal tissue (both enzyme treated and untreated), and you see two bands for enzyme treated tumor sample but two bands for untreated tumor DNA, then you are surely looking at a polyclonal tumor. However, if you see the same number of bands only with a single band after enzyme treatment, there is a rather high chance for the tumor of your interest to be monoclonal. In this last case, monoclonality is not for sure because, as stated earlier, there is the possibility of having exact same -CAG- repeats on both alleles.\n", "id": "50274456", "title": "HUMARA assay"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50533059", "text": "Use of beta-adrenergic agonists livestock\n\nBeta-adrenergic agonists, or β-agonists, are non-hormonal growth promotants that help animals put on muscle instead of fat. Ractopamine (brand names include Optaflexx and Paylean) and zilpaterol (brand name Zilmax) received FDA approval in 1999 and 2003, respectively. They are also approved in Mexico, South Africa, and Canada. 160 countries restrict the importation of beef which has been raised with β-agonists. Temple Grandin was one of the first to describe the potential problems with the supplement. Cattle may arrive at the plant with a stiff gait, acting like they have both stiff muscles and sore feet. The problem could be muscle fatigue. Zilpateral enhances the growth of “fast-twitch” fibers, a type of muscle fiber that fatigues more easily. On August 16, 2013 Merck and Co., the makers of Zilmax, suspended the sale of the product in the US and Canada. But problems may exist with all β-agonists supplementation, and not just for animals.\n\nThe family of β-agonists includes β1-, β2-, and β3-agonists such as clenbuterol, ractopamine, cimaterol, zilpaterol and salbutamol. They possess similar chemical structures with different substituent groups on the phenyl ethanolamines. Due to their significant nutrition redistribution function, β-agonists have been applied in the livestock industry such as pigs and ruminants to reduce carcass fat and increase muscle mass while improving growth rate and feed conversion (Bareille and Faverdin, 1996, Bergen et al., 1989, Byrem et al., 1998, Cardoso and Taveira, 2002, Shook et al., 2009 and Williams et al., 1987). Unfortunately, β-agonists deposited in animal tissues can cause acute poisoning when consumed by humans, particularly in people with symptoms of muscular tremors, cardiac palpitation, nervousness, headache, muscular pain, dizziness, nausea, vomiting, fever and chills (Brambilla et al., 2000). Therefore, the use of β-agonists in animal feeds has been banned in many countries such as the EU and China (Mitchell and Dunnavan, 1998 and Prezelj et al., 2003). There are still illicit usages of β-agonists in animal feeds in many countries.\n\nBroad screening and identification of β-agonists in feed and animal body fluid and tissues using ultra-high performance liquid chromatography-quadrupole-orbitrap high resolution mass spectrometry combined with spectra library search\n• Tingting Lia, 1, \n• Jingjing Caob, 1, \n• Zhen Lib, \n• Xian Wanga, \n• Pingli Hea, \n\nBroad screening and identification of β-agonists in feed, serum, urine, muscle and liver samples was achieved in a quick and highly sensitive manner using ultra high performance liquid chromatography-quadrupole-orbitrap high resolution mass spectrometry (UHPLC-Q-Orbitrap HRMS) combined with a spectra library search. Solid-phase extraction technology was employed for sample purification and enrichment. After extraction and purification, the samples were analyzed using a Q-Orbitrap high-resolution mass spectrometer under full-scan and data-dependent MS/MS mode. The acquired mass spectra were compared with an in-house library (compound library and MS/MS mass spectral library) built with TraceFinder Software which contained the M/Z of the precursor ion, chemical formula, retention time, character fragment ions and the entire MS/MS spectra of 32 β-agonist standards. Screening was achieved by comparing 5 key mass spectral results and positive matches were marked. Using the developed method, the identification results from 10 spiked samples and 238 actual samples indicated that only 2% of acquired mass spectra produced false identities. The method validation results showed that the limit of detection ranged from 0.021–3.854 μg kg−1and 0.015–1.198 ng mL−1 for solid and liquid samples, respectively.\n", "id": "50533059", "title": "Use of beta-adrenergic agonists livestock"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50238405", "text": "Lorquin Entomological Society\n\nThe Lorquin Entomological Society is a century-old association of professional and amateur entomologists, biologists and naturalists that meet regularly to study and promote entomology and natural history, especially about wildlife in and near Southern California.\n\nThe Lorquin Natural History Club was started in June 1913 by Fordyce Grinnell Jr. A constitution committee was formed in July, and a constitution adopted at the August meeting. It was named after French entomologist Pierre Joseph Michel Lorquin, who collected specimens in California during the California Gold Rush. Early members included not only entomologists like Grinnell, but herpetologists, botanists, an ornithologist, a conchologist, a geologist, and seismologist Charles F. Richter, whose specialty at the time was astronomy. Monthly meetings were held in private homes.\n\nThe group was renamed the Lorquin Entomological Club in 1917 and its meetings moved to the Los Angeles Public Library. In 1919 the club began meeting in the Southwest Museum in Highland Park. Early club activities included field trips into the hills and canyons beyond the termini of the Red Cars of the Pacific Electric and the Yellow Cars of the Los Angeles Railway. It was an era when a butterfly collector could net over 500 in a single day and take over 100 species in the Los Angeles area. The club held their first Butterfly Show February 24–26, 1921, at the Southwest Museum. Among other things it featured a lecture on butterfly hunting, illustrated by stereopticon slides, by museum director John Adams Comstock.\n\nThe Butterfly Show became an annual, month-long event, sponsored by the Museum of History, Science, and Art. In 1926, the Southwest Museum narrowed its scope. Natural history exhibits and specimens were transferred to the Museum of History, Science, and Art. In January 1927, the club moved its meetings there as well, and changed its name to the Lorquin Entomological Society. Comstock, who had been director of the Southwest Museum from 1921 to 1926, published his landmark \"Butterflies of California\" in 1927. Early in 1928 he became Acting Director of the Museum of History, Science, and Art. He served several terms as president of the society. Under his influence, and that of his colleague Charles Montagu Dammers, the society's emphasis evolved from collecting to life history studies. Members in the late 1920s and early 1930s included biologists John Shrader Garth, Jeane Daniel Gunder, Lloyd M. Martin, and Don Meadows.\n\nIn 1929, the society decided that California should name a state insect. They prepared ballots listing three butterfly candidates and sent them to entomologists throughout the state. The nominees were the Lorquin's admiral (\"Limenitis lorquini\"), the California sister (\"Heterochroa californica\"), and the California dog head or Flying pansy (\"Zerene eurydice\"). The California dog head won handily, with 77 votes out of 88 cast. The state legislature took note, and the Bureau of Entomology in the California Department of Agriculture began to use a likeness of the California dog head, labeled \"California State Insect\" on its documents. No further action took place, however, until 1972, when Assemblyman Kenneth L. Maddy introduced Assembly Bill No. 1843 to make what was by then known as the California dogface the official state insect. Governor Ronald Reagan signed the bill into law on July 28, 1972, making California the first in the nation to have a state insect.\n\nIn 1986, Steven R. Kutcher, a member of the society, organized the first annual Insect Fair at the Los Angeles County Arboretum and Botanic Garden. It featured exhibits by the society and others, demonstrations, and lectures. When the fair outgrew the Arboretum, it was moved in 1989 to the Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County (the erstwhile Museum of History, Science, and Art). Eventually the Natural History Museum took over organizing the fair and has done so since. What is now known as Bug Fair, and bills itself as \"the biggest bug festival in North America\", draws 20,000 visitors to its interactive exhibits, vendor tables, and insect menus.\n\nThe society has counted as members many academics, authors, and museum curators in the field of entomology, such as brothers John F. and Thomas C. Emmel, Cristopher Henne, Charles L. Hogue and son James N. 'Jim' Hogue, Noel McFarland, and Rudolf H. T. Mattioni. Members are active in research, environmental protection, habitat restoration, species surveys, entomological outreach, and natural history education. As of 2013, membership stood at just over 100. Regular meetings with speakers are held on the fourth Friday of every month, at BioQuip (a biological supply house in Rancho Dominguez) since remodeling ousted the society from the Natural History Museum in 2009.\n\nThe club published eighteen monthly issues of \"Lorquinia\" between August 1916 and January 1919. They contained botanical and entomological papers and notes. Since about 1955, it has published a newsletter (10 issues per year), most recently called \"NetWork\". In 1999, it published a book by Robert Lee Allen, \"Stalking the wild arthropod: The Lorquin Entomological Society's guide to photographing arthropods\".\n\n\n", "id": "50238405", "title": "Lorquin Entomological Society"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42940", "text": "Biostasis\n\nBiostasis is the ability of an organism to tolerate environmental changes without having to actively adapt to them. Biostasis is found in organisms that live in habitats that likely encounter unfavorable living conditions, such as drought, freezing temperatures, change in pH levels, pressure, or temperature. Insects undergo a type of dormancy to survive these conditions, called diapause. Diapause may be obligatory for these insects to survive. The insect may also be able to undergo change prior to the arrival of the initiating event.\n\nBiostasis is also used as a synonym for the terms cryostasis or cryonics. Cryonics is a medical procedure concept that is a well established trope in Science Fiction, that may at some point in the future become a possible option for individuals who are terminally ill. The patients would be frozen in what is known as cryonic suspension. The patients are frozen so that when technology advances both to enable them to be unfrozen and brought back to life but also for their illness to be treated, they can be re-animated and their disease can be cured or treated.\n\nMedical biostasis can be put to use in humans to help repair brain damage. \n\nThere is evidence that suggests that medical biostasis procedures could be performed by trauma surgeons by 2026.\n", "id": "42940", "title": "Biostasis"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43868891", "text": "Social Bonding and Nurture Kinship\n\nSocial Bonding and Nurture Kinship: Compatibility between Cultural and Biological Approaches is a book on human kinship and social behavior by Maximilian Holland, published in 2012. The work synthesizes the perspectives of evolutionary biology, psychology and sociocultural anthropology towards understanding human social bonding and cooperative behavior. It presents a theoretical treatment that many consider to have resolved longstanding questions about the proper place of genetic (or 'blood') connections in human kinship and social relations, and a synthesis that \"\"should inspire more nuanced ventures in applying Darwinian approaches to sociocultural anthropology\"\". The book has been called \"\"A landmark in the field of evolutionary biology\"\" which \"\"gets to the heart of the matter concerning the contentious relationship between kinship categories, genetic relatedness and the prediction of behavior\"\", \"\"places genetic determinism in the correct perspective\"\" and serves as \"\"a shining example of what can be achieved when excellent scholars engage fully across disciplinary boundaries.\"\"\n\nThe aim of the book is to show that \"\"properly interpreted, cultural anthropology approaches (and ethnographic data) and biological approaches are perfectly compatible regarding processes of social bonding in humans.\"\" Holland's position is based on demonstrating that the dominant biological theory of social behavior (inclusive fitness theory) is typically misunderstood to predict that genetic ties are necessary for the \"expression\" of social behaviors, whereas in fact the theory only implicates genetic associations as necessary for the \"evolution\" of social behaviors. Whilst rigorous evolutionary biologists have long understood the distinction between these levels of analysis (see Tinbergen's four questions), past attempts to apply inclusive fitness theory to humans have often overlooked the distinction between \"evolution\" and \"expression\".\n\nBeyond its central argument, the broader philosophical implications of Holland's work are considered by commentators to be that it both \"\"helps to untangle a long-standing disciplinary muddle\"\" and \"\"clarifies the relationship between biological and sociocultural approaches to human kinship.\"\" It is claimed that the book \"\"demonstrates that an alternative non-deterministic interpretation of evolutionary biology is more compatible with actual human social behavior and with the frameworks that sociocultural anthropology employs\"\" and as a consequence, delivers \"\"a convincing, solid and informed blow to the residual genetic determinism that still influences the interpretation of social behaviour.\"\"\n\nThe book's form consists of a cumulative argument (using a wide range of supporting evidence) made over nine chapters, with each chapter ending in a brief retrospective summary, and the final chapter containing a recapitulation and summary of the whole, and drawing some wider conclusions.\n\nHolland begins by tracing transitions in the history of anthropological theories of social behavior and kinship, noting the varying importance with which 'blood ties' have been understood to be a necessary element of human kinship and social relations. He suggests that whilst the mounting ethnographic evidence has led to a move away from the 'blood kinship' concept in recent decades, many sociocultural anthropologists still query the connection between kinship and blood, reproduction or some other apparently biological functions. Meanwhile, many biologists, biological anthropologists and evolutionary psychologists have persisted in viewing human kinship and cooperative behavior as necessarily associated with genetic relationships and 'blood ties'. The current situation has been characterized as \"\"a clash between incommensurate paradigms, holding as they may, completely incompatible ideas about human nature.\"\" Holland argues that a clear resolution to these questions is still outstanding, and would therefore be of value. In closing the introduction, Holland writes; \"The approach is not reductive. The claim is rather that a thorough investigation of the ‘biological facts’ can be useful mainly though allowing a change in focus... away from confusion about the place of genealogy in social ties, and onto a reformulated baseline, built around varied \"processual aspects of social bonding.\"\"\n\nThe book reviews the background and key elements of Hamilton's inclusive fitness theory from the 1960s onwards, setting out its significant conceptual and heuristic value. Holland notes that Hamilton acknowledged that his earliest and most widely known account (1964) contained technical inaccuracies. He also notes Hamilton's early speculations about possible proximate mechanisms of the expression of social behavior (\"supergenes\" as a possible alternative to \"behaviour-evoking-situations\") contained errors that have nevertheless remained very influential in popular accounts. Specifically, the supergenes notion (sometimes called the \"Green-beard effect\") - that organisms may evolve genes that are able to identify identical copies in others and preferentially direct social behaviours towards them - was theoretically clarified and withdrawn by Hamilton in 1987. However, in the intervening years, the notion that supergenes (or more often, simply individual organisms) have evolved \"to identify genetic relatives and preferentially cooperate with them\" took hold, and became the way many biologists came to understand the theory. This persisted, despite Hamilton's 1987 correction. In Holland's view it is the pervasiveness of this longstanding but erroneous perspective, and the suppression of the alternative 'behaviour-evoking-situations' perspective regarding social expression mechanisms, that is largely responsible for the ongoing clash between biological and sociocultural approaches to human kinship.\n\nHolland shows that, in the 1970s and 80s, the first wave of attempts (known as \"human sociobiology\" or \"Darwinian anthropology\") to apply inclusive fitness theory to human social behavior relied on, and further reinforced, this same misinterpretation (above section) about the theory's predictions and the proximate mechanisms of social behavior. Holland also shows that this period of research was burdened with many misplaced assumptions about \"universal\" attributes of the human sexes, sexuality and gender roles, apparently projected from the \"specific cultural values\" of the researchers themselves. Holland also shows that, following the perceived failures of this early wave, and particularly its methodological agnosticism regarding proximate mechanisms of social behavior, the evolutionary psychology school grew up in its place. Although this latter school typically avoided engaging with the ethnographic data on human kinship, Holland argues that in the few cases where it did so, it repeated the misinterpretation of inclusive fitness theory that characterized the first wave. Holland also notes that Kitcher, in his critique of the sociobiological position, suggested that perhaps the expression of social behaviors in humans might quite simply be based on cues of context and familiarity, rather than genetic relatedness \"per se\".\n\nChapters four and five investigate further the theory and evidence surrounding the \"proximate mechanisms\" of social behavior; specifically the question of whether social behaviors are expressed by organisms via \"behaviour-evoking-situations\" or via direct detection of actual genetic relatedness. Related questions have been the domain of kin recognition theory. Holland notes that the name 'kin recognition' itself suggests some expectation that a positive identification of genetic relatedness is a prediction of inclusive fitness theory, and is thus expected. Similar points have been made by others; \"many behavioural ecologists seem to implicitly assume that specialised mechanisms allowing individuals to distinguish their kin from non-kin must have evolved.\" Again, the possibility that \"behaviour-evoking-situations\" might be the more parsimonious mechanism of the expression of social behavior, and fully compatible with inclusive fitness theory, has often been underemphasized. However, Holland's review of the evidence notes that field studies in this area quickly established that \"behaviour-evoking-situations\" do in fact overwhelmingly mediate social behaviours in those species studied, and that, particularly in mammal species, social bonding and familiarity formed in early developmental contexts (e.g. in burrows or nesting sites) are a common mediating mechanism for social behaviors, independently of genetic relatedness \"per se\". On the basis of the preceding theoretical analysis and review of evidence, at the end of chapter five, Holland argues that;\nIt is entirely erroneous, both in reference to theory and in reference to the evidence, to claim or suggest that 'the facts of biology' support the claim that organisms have evolved to cooperate with genetic relatives \"per se\".\n\nHaving argued for the above position on the lack of necessity for genetic relatedness \"per se\" to mediate social bonding and behavior, Holland suggests that \"The further question then is; can we uncover in any greater detail how familiarity and other context-dependent cues operate?\". To discover the extent to which the variety of human kinship behaviors may nevertheless be compatible with this (less deterministic) interpretation of biological theory of social behavior, Holland suggests that a survey of primates' most fundamental social patterns may give clues, especially those of species most closely connected with humans. The variety of primate mating systems, group-membership ('philopatry') patterns, and life-cycle patterns are reviewed. Holland finds that;\n\nLike other mammals, Catarrhini primate demographics are strongly influenced by ecological conditions, particularly density and distribution of food sources... Cohesive social groups and delayed natal dispersal mean that maternally related individuals, including maternal siblings, face a statistically reliable context of interaction in all Catarrhini primates. This reliable context of interaction with maternally related individuals is extended amongst those species with female philopatry (especially Cercopithecinae).\n\nAs with other social mammals, evidence suggest that the reliability of 'behaviour-evoking-situations' this social context provides has shaped the mechanisms of proximate expression of social bonding and behavior;\n\nAdoption of infants by females (and sometimes males) demonstrates that care-giving and bonding to infants is not mediated by positive powers of discrimination. From the infant's perspective, it will bond with any responsive carer. If not necessarily the actual mother, in natural conditions this will often be a maternal relative (particularly an older sibling), but the context is primary, not the actual relatedness. Similarly, social bonding and social behaviours between maternal siblings (and occasionally between other maternal relatives) is context-driven in primates, and mediated via the care-giver.\n\nHolland also notes how Bowlby and colleagues' attachment theory was strongly informed by primate bonding patterns and mechanisms, and that in Bowlby's later writing the then emerging inclusive fitness theory was explicitly linked to. \n[Bowlby's] work demonstrated that social attachments form on the basis of provision of care, and responsiveness to elicitations for care. The social context of living together and the familiarity this brings, provides the circumstance within which social bonds can form...\n\nOn the basis of combining more recent primate research with the findings of attachment theory, Holland proposes that \"In attempting to define more specific forms of \"the giving of care and nurture\" which may mediate social bonding we [find] that provision of food is likely to play a part, as well as the more intangible provision of warmth and comfort, and a safe base for sleeping.\"\n\nHolland claims that, while biological theory of social behavior is not deterministic in respect of genetic relatedness vis-a-vis the formation of social bonds and expression of social behaviors, evidence does point to compatibility between a non-reductive interpretation of the theory and how such bonds and behaviors operate in social mammals, primates and in humans. In the final part of the book, Holland explores the extent to which this perspective is also compatible with sociocultural anthropology's ethnographic accounts of human kinship and social behavior, both occasional accounts from the past, as well as more contemporary accounts that have explicitly eschewed the earlier 'blood ties' assumption. Holland finds that;\n\nMany contemporary accounts focus on social bonds formed in childhood and the importance of the performance of acts of care, including food provision, in mediating these bonds. In all cases it is this performance of care which is considered the overriding factor in\nmediating social bonds, notwithstanding 'blood ties'. In short, there is strong compatibility between the perspectives on social bonding that emerge from a proper account of biological theory and those documented by ethnographers.\n\nHolland's concluding chapter gives a summary of his fundamental position;\n\nA crucial implication of this argument taken as a whole is that \"the expression of the kinds of social behaviours treated by inclusive fitness theory does not require genetic relatedness.\" Sociobiology and evolutionary psychology's claims that biological science predicts that organisms \"will\" direct social behaviour towards relatives are thus both \"theoretically\" and \"empirically\" erroneous. Such claims and their supporting arguments also give a highly misleading and reductive account of basic biological theory. Properly interpreted, \"cultural anthropology approaches (and ethnographic data) and biological approaches are perfectly compatible\" regarding processes of social bonding in humans. Most of all, this requires a focus on the circumstances and processes which lead to social bonding.\n\nThe book notes that, as an outcome of the analysis, Schneider's sociocultural perspective on human kinship is vindicated;\n\nDo the biological facts have some priority or are they but one of the conditions, like ecology, economy, demography, etc., to which kinship systems must adapt? Take note: if the latter is the case, then kinship must be as much rooted in these other conditions as in the biological facts.\n\nThe author supplies several examples of the insight that Schneider's broad approach can provide. The book closes with an example of a clash of cultural perspectives on kinship and family norms, and makes the suggestion that;\n\nConstructing from narrow cultural particulars (Euro-American or otherwise) an essentialised model of 'human nature' does not constitute science; it is closer to cultural colonialism. In any analysis intended to shed light on proposed universals of the human condition, reflexivity is essential, and cultural and biological approaches both surely necessary.\n\nKinship theorist and member of the national academy of science, Robin Fox wrote of the work:\n\nAn excellent and constructive discussion of matters in kinship and its cultural and biological components, handsomely reconciling what have been held to be incompatible positions.Max Holland gets to the heart of the matter concerning the contentious relationship between kinship categories, genetic relatedness and the prediction of behavior. If he had been in the debate in the 1980s then a lot of subsequent confusion could have been avoided\"\n\nIrwin Bernstein, distinguished research professor in the university of Georgia's \"Behavioral and Brain Sciences Program\" made the following comment on Holland's book:\n\nMax Holland has demonstrated extraordinarily thorough scholarship in his exhaustive review of the often contentious discussions of kinship. He has produced a balanced synthesis melding the two approaches exemplified in the biological and sociocultural behavioral positions. His work in reconciling opposing views clearly demonstrates the value of interdisciplinary approaches. This should be the definitive word on the subject.\n\nPhilip Kitcher, John Dewey Professor of Philosophy, and James R. Barker Professorship of Contemporary Civilization at Columbia University, past president of the American Philosophical Association and inaugural winner of the Prometheus Prize, stated of the book:\n\nMax Holland has provided a wide-ranging and deeply-probing analysis of the influence of genetic relatedness and social context on human kinship. He argues that while genetic relatedness may play a role in the evolution of social behavior, it does not determine the forms of such behavior. His discussion is exemplary for its thoroughness, and should inspire more nuanced ventures in applying Darwinian approaches to sociocultural anthropology.\n\nKirk Endicott, professor emeritus of anthropology at the university of Dartmouth, wrote that Holland's book was:\n\nA brilliant discussion of the relationship between kinship and social bonding as understood in evolutionary biology and in sociocultural anthropology. Among other contributions, it debunks the common misconception that biological evolution involves individual organisms actively pursuing the goal of increasing the numbers of their genes in successive generations, the measure of their so-called ‘individual inclusive fitness’. Holland demonstrates that an alternative non-deterministic interpretation of evolutionary biology is more compatible with actual human social behavior and with the frameworks that sociocultural anthropology employs.\n\nJanet Carsten, kinship theorist and professor of anthropology at the university of Edinburgh stated that:\n\nThis book is a scholarly attempt to get beyond the often sterile oppositions between evolutionary and culturalist approaches to kinship. In bringing together two sides of the debate, it constitutes a valuable contribution to kinship studies.\n\nIn a review for the journal Critique of Anthropology, Nicholas Malone concluded that:\n\nLucid and effective... Holland has produced a significant work of scholarship that will be of interest to a wide swath of the anthropological community.\n\nCommenting on the book for the journal Social Analysis, Anni Kajanus found that:\n\nHolland has done an excellent and thorough job in reviewing the disciplinary and interdisciplinary histories of approaches to kinship and social bonds in anthropology, biology, and psychology. Most importantly, he clarifies the different levels of analysis when looking at human behavior in real time and in the evolutionary time frame. This makes the book essential reading for anyone who acknowledges that human relatedness and social bonds are shaped by the\nevolved dispositions of our species, their development through the life-course of an individual, and our specific cultural-historical environments... Holland’s book goes a long way toward clarifying and therefore advancing these theoretical debates\n\nAn in-depth review of the book by primatologist Augusto Vitale, in the journal \"Folia Primatologica\", found that:\n\nStuart Semple, evolutionary anthropologist, reviewing the book in the journal \"Acta Ethologica\" stated that:\n\nAs someone who teaches behavioural ecology to biologists, and primate biology to social and biological anthropologists, I will be strongly recommending this book to all of my advanced undergraduates, masters and PhD students, as well as to my colleagues. Not only does it help to resolve debates that have run for many years, but it is also an outstanding example of what can be achieved by immersing oneself in literature from different fields, while retaining an intellectual openness and exercising incisive analysis. Many of us talk enthusiastically about inter- and multi-disciplinarity, but often this is not much more than lip service. This book is a shining example of what can be achieved when excellent scholars engage fully across disciplinary boundaries. There should be more texts like this.\n\nIn addition to praise for the book's significance, the Folia Primatologica review noted that the book is at times too dense and requires close reading;\nThe argument here and there becomes too detailed and tortuous, but it is absolutely captivating... [Colleagues] who are less used to extremely detailed theoretical reasoning, will find it difficult at the beginning...\n\n", "id": "43868891", "title": "Social Bonding and Nurture Kinship"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51066217", "text": "Methyl green\n\nMethyl green (CI 42585) is a cationic or positive charged stain, related to Ethyl green, that has been used for staining DNA since the XIX century. It has been used for staining cell nuclei either as a part of the classical Unna-Pappenheim stain, or as a nuclear counterstain ever since.<br>\nIn recent years, its fluorescent properties when bound to DNA have positioned it useful for far-red imaging of live cell nuclei. \nFluorescent DNA staining is routinely used in cancer prognosis.<br>\nMethyl green also emerges as an alternative stain for DNA in agarose gels, fluorometric assays and flow cytometry. It has also been shown that it can be used as an exclusion viability stain for cells.\nIts interaction with DNA has been shown to be non-intercalating, in other words not inserting itself into the DNA, but instead electrostatic with the DNA major groove. It is used in combination with pyronin in the methyl green–pyronin stain which stains and differentiates DNA and RNA.\n", "id": "51066217", "title": "Methyl green"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51179574", "text": "Tactoid\n\nTactoids are liquid crystal microdomains nucleated in isotropic phases, which can be distinguished as spherical or spindle-shaped birefringent microdroplets under polarized light microscopy. Tactoids are a transition state between isotropic and macroscopic liquid crystalline phases. The first observation of tactoids was made by Zocher in 1925, when he studied the nematic phase formed in vanadium pentoxide sols. After that, tactoids have been found in the phase transition processes in many lyotropic liquid crystalline substances, such as tobacco mosaic virus, polypeptides, and cellulose nanocrystals.\n", "id": "51179574", "title": "Tactoid"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51299313", "text": "293T\n\n293T (or HEK293T) is a human cell line, derived from the HEK 293 cell line, that expresses a mutant version of the SV40 large T antigen. It is very commonly used in biology for protein expression and production of recombinant retroviruses.\n\n293T was created in Michele Calos's lab at Stanford by stable transfection of the HEK 293 cell line with a plasmid encoding a temperature-sensitive mutant of the SV40 large T antigen; it was originally referred to as 293/\"tsA1609neo\". The first reference to the cell line as \"293T\" may be its use to create the BOSC23 packaging cell line for producing retroviral particles.\n\nThe transfection used to create 293T (involving plasmid pRSV-1609) conferred neomycin/G418 resistance and expression of the tsA1609 allele of SV40 large T antigen; this allele is fully active at 33 °C (its permissive temperature), has substantial function at 37 °C, and is inactive at 40 °C. 293T is very efficiently transfectable with DNA (like its parent HEK 293). Due to the expression of SV40 large T antigen, transfected plasmid DNAs that carry the SV40 origin of replication can replicate in 293T and will transiently maintain a high copy number; this can greatly increase the amount of recombinant protein or retrovirus that can be produced from the cells.\n\nThe full genome sequences of three different isolates of 293T have been determined. They are quite similar to each other but show detectable divergence from the parental HEK 293 cell line.\n\n", "id": "51299313", "title": "293T"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38076", "text": "Gender\n\nGender is the range of characteristics pertaining to, and differentiating between, masculinity and femininity. Depending on the context, these characteristics may include biological sex (i.e., the state of being male, female, or an intersex variation), sex-based social structures (i.e., gender roles), or gender identity. People who do not identify as having a male or female gender are often grouped under the umbrella terms \"non-binary\" or \"genderqueer\". Some cultures have specific gender roles that are distinct from male and female, such as the hijras of South Asia. These are often referred to as \"third gender\".\n\nSexologist John Money introduced the terminological distinction between biological sex and gender as a role in 1955. Before his work, it was uncommon to use the word \"gender\" to refer to anything but grammatical categories. However, Money's meaning of the word did not become widespread until the 1970s, when feminist theory embraced the concept of a distinction between biological sex and the social construct of gender. Today the distinction is strictly followed in some contexts, especially the social sciences and documents written by the World Health Organization (WHO).\n\nIn other contexts, including some areas of social sciences, \"gender\" includes \"sex\" or replaces it. For instance, in non-human animal research, \"gender\" is commonly used to refer to the biological sex of the animals. This change in the meaning of gender can be traced to the 1980s. In 1993, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) started to use \"gender\" instead of \"sex\". Later, in 2011, the FDA reversed its position and began using \"sex \"as the biological classification and \"gender\" as \"a person's self representation as male or female, or how that person is responded to by social institutions based on the individual's gender presentation.\"\n\nThe social sciences have a branch devoted to gender studies. Other sciences, such as sexology and neuroscience, are also interested in the subject. While the social sciences sometimes approach gender as a social construct, and gender studies particularly do, research in the natural sciences investigates whether biological differences in males and females influence the development of gender in humans; both inform debate about how far biological differences influence the formation of gender identity. In the English literature, there is also a trichotomy between biological sex, psychological gender, and social gender role. This framework first appeared in a feminist paper on transsexualism in 1978.\n\nThe modern English word \"gender\" comes from the Middle English \"gender\" (also \"gendere\", \"gendir\" \"gendyr\", \"gendre\"), a loanword from Anglo-Norman and Middle French \"gendre\". This, in turn, came from Latin \"genus\". Both words mean \"kind\", \"type\", or \"sort\". They derive ultimately from a widely attested Proto-Indo-European (PIE) root \"gn-\",\nwhich is also the source of \"kin\", \"kind\", \"king\", and many other English words. It appears in Modern French in the word \"genre\" (type, kind, also \"\") and is related to the Greek root \"gen-\" (to produce), appearing in \"gene\", \"genesis\", and \"oxygen\". The first edition of the Oxford English Dictionary (OED1, Volume 4, 1900) notes the original meaning of \"gender\" as \"kind\" had already become obsolete.\n\nThe word was still widely attested, however, in the specific sense of grammatical gender (the assignment of nouns to categories such as \"masculine\", \"feminine\" and \"neuter\"). According to Aristotle, this concept was introduced by the Greek philosopher Protagoras.\nIn 1926, Henry Watson Fowler stated that the definition of the word pertains to this grammar-related meaning: \n\nThe modern academic sense of the word, in the context of social roles of men and women, dates at least back to 1945, and was popularized and developed by the feminist movement from the 1970s onwards (see § Feminism theory and gender studies below). The theory was that human nature is essentially epicene and social distinctions based on sex are arbitrarily constructed. Matters pertaining to this theoretical process of social construction were labelled matters of \"gender\".\n\nThe popular use of \"gender\" simply as an alternative to \"sex\" (as a biological category) is also widespread, although attempts are still made to preserve the distinction. The American Heritage Dictionary (2000) uses the following two sentences to illustrate the difference, noting that the distinction \"is useful in principle, but it is by no means widely observed, and considerable variation in usage occurs at all levels.\"\n\nIn the last two decades of the 20th century, the use of \"gender\" in academia has increased greatly, outnumbering uses of \"sex\" in the social sciences. While the spread of the word in science publications can be attributed to the influence of feminism, its use as a synonym for sex is attributed to the failure to grasp the distinction made in feminist theory, and the distinction has sometimes become blurred with the theory itself; David Haig stated, \"Among the reasons that working scientists have given me for choosing gender rather than sex in biological contexts are desires to signal sympathy with feminist goals, to use a more academic term, or to avoid the connotation of copulation.\"\n\nIn legal cases alleging discrimination, \"sex\" is usually preferred as the determining factor rather than \"gender\" as it refers to biology rather than socially constructed norms which are more open to interpretation and dispute. Julie Greenberg writes that although gender and sex are separate concepts, they are interlinked in that gender discrimination often results from stereotypes based on what is expected of members of each sex. In \"J.E.B. v. Alabama ex rel. T.B.\", United States Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia wrote:\n\n\"Gender identity\" refers to a personal identification with a particular gender and gender role in society. The term \"woman\" has historically been used interchangeably with reference to the female body, though more recently this usage has been viewed as controversial by some feminists.\n\n<nowiki> </nowiki>There are qualitative analyses that explore and present the representations of gender; however, feminists challenge these dominant ideologies concerning gender roles and biological sex. One's biological sex is directly tied to specific social roles and the expectations. Judith Butler considers the concept of being a woman to have more challenges, owing not only to society's viewing women as a social category but also as a felt sense of self, a culturally conditioned or constructed subjective identity. \"Social identity\" refers to the common identification with a collectivity or social category that creates a common culture among participants concerned. According to social identity theory, an important component of the self-concept is derived from memberships in social groups and categories; this is demonstrated by group processes and how inter-group relationships impact significantly on individuals' self perception and behaviors. The groups people belong to therefore provide members with the definition of who they are and how they should behave within their social sphere.\n\nCategorizing males and females into social roles creates a problem, because individuals feel they have to be at one end of a linear spectrum and must identify themselves as man or woman, rather than being allowed to choose a section in between. Globally, communities interpret biological differences between men and women to create a set of social expectations that define the behaviors that are \"appropriate\" for men and women and determine women’s and men’s different access to rights, resources, power in society and health behaviors. Although the specific nature and degree of these differences vary from one society to the next, they still tend to typically favor men, creating an imbalance in power and gender inequalities within most societies. Many cultures have different systems of norms and beliefs based on gender, but there is no universal standard to a masculine or feminine role across all cultures. Social roles of men and women in relation to each other is based on the cultural norms of that society, which lead to the creation of gender systems. The gender system is the basis of social patterns in many societies, which include the separation of sexes, and the primacy of masculine norms.\n\nPhilosopher Michel Foucault said that as sexual subjects, humans are the object of power, which is not an institution or structure, rather it is a signifier or name attributed to \"complex strategical situation\". Because of this, \"power\" is what determines individual attributes, behaviors, etc. and people are a part of an ontologically and epistemologically constructed set of names and labels. Such as, being female characterizes one as a woman, and being a woman signifies one as weak, emotional, and irrational, and is incapable of actions attributed to a \"man\". Butler said that gender and sex are more like verbs than nouns. She reasoned that her actions are limited because she is female. \"I am not permitted to construct my gender and sex willy-nilly,\" she said. \"[This] is so because gender is politically and therefore socially controlled. Rather than 'woman' being something one is, it is something one does.\" More recent criticisms of Judith Butler's theories critique her writing for reinforcing the very conventional dichotomies of gender.\n\nAccording to gender theorist Kate Bornstein, gender can have ambiguity and fluidity. There are two contrasting ideas regarding the definition of gender, and the intersection of both of them is definable as below:\n\nThe World Health Organization defines gender as the result of socially constructed ideas about the behavior, actions, and roles a particular sex performs. The beliefs, values and attitude taken up and exhibited by them is as per the agreeable norms of the society and the personal opinions of the person is not taken into the primary consideration of assignment of gender and imposition of gender roles as per the assigned gender. Intersections and crossing of the prescribed boundaries have no place in the arena of the social construct of the term \"gender\".\n\nThe assignment of gender involves taking into account the physiological and biological attributes assigned by nature followed by the imposition of the socially constructed conduct. The social label of being classified into one or the other sex is necessary for the medical stamp on birth certificates. \"Gender\" is a term used to exemplify the attributes that a society or culture constitutes as \"masculine\" or \"feminine\". Although a person's sex as male or female stands as a biological fact that is identical in any culture, what that specific sex means in reference to a person's gender role as a woman or a man in society varies cross culturally according to what things are considered to be masculine or feminine. These roles are learned from various, intersecting sources such as parental influences, the socialization a child receives in school, and what is portrayed in the local media. It is also important to note that learning gender roles starts from birth and includes seemingly simple things like what color outfits a baby is clothed in or what toys they are given to play with. The cultural traits typically coupled to a particular sex finalize the assignment of gender and the biological differences which play a role in classifying either sex as interchangeable with the definition of gender within the social context.\n\nIn this context, the socially constructed rules are at a cross road with the assignment of a particular gender to a person. Gender ambiguity deals with having the freedom to choose, manipulate and create a personal niche within any defined socially constructed code of conduct while gender fluidity is outlawing all the rules of cultural gender assignment. It does not accept the prevalence of the two rigidly defined genders \"man\" and \"woman\" and believes in freedom to choose any kind of gender with no rules, no defined boundaries and no fulfilling of expectations associated with any particular gender.\n\nBoth these definitions are facing opposite directions with their own defined set of rules and criteria on which the said systems are based.\n\nSexologist John Money coined the term \"gender role\" in 1955. The term \"gender role\" is defined as the actions or responses that may reveal their status as boy, man, girl or woman, respectively. Elements surrounding gender roles include clothing, speech patterns, movement, occupations, and other factors not limited to biological sex. In contrast to taxonomic approaches, some feminist philosophers have argued that gender \"is a vast orchestration of subtle mediations between oneself and others\", rather than a \"private cause behind manifest behaviours\".\n\nBecause social aspects of gender can normally be presumed to be the ones of interest in sociology and closely related disciplines, \"gender role\" is often abbreviated to \"gender\" in their literature.\n\nTraditionally, most societies have only recognized two distinct, broad classes of gender roles, masculine and feminine, that correspond with the biological sexes of male and female. When a baby is born, society allocates the child to one gender or the other, on the basis of what their genitals resemble. However, some societies explicitly incorporate people who adopt the gender role opposite to their biological sex; for example, the two-spirit people of some indigenous American peoples. Other societies include well-developed roles that are explicitly considered more or less distinct from archetypal female and male roles in those societies. In the language of the sociology of gender, they comprise a third gender, more or less distinct from biological sex (sometimes the basis for the role does include intersexuality or incorporates eunuchs).\nOne such gender role is that adopted by the hijras of India and Pakistan. Another example may be the muxe (pronounced ), found in the state of Oaxaca, in southern Mexico. The Bugis people of Sulawesi, Indonesia have a tradition that incorporates all the features above.\n\nIn addition to these traditionally recognized third genders, many cultures now recognize, to differing degrees, various non-binary gender identities. People who are non-binary (or genderqueer) have gender identities that are not exclusively masculine or feminine. They may identify as having an overlap of gender identities, having two or more genders, having no gender, having a fluctuating gender identity, or being third gender or other-gendered. Recognition of non-binary genders is still somewhat new to mainstream Western culture, and non-binary people may face increased risk of assault, harassment, and discrimination.\n\nJoan Roughgarden argues that some non-human animal species also have more than two genders, in that there might be multiple templates for behavior available to individual organisms with a given biological sex.\n\nEarly gender identity research hypothesized a single bipolar dimension of masculinity-femininity, with masculinity and femininity being opposites on one continuum. Assumptions of the unidimensional model were challenged as societal stereotypes changed, which led to the development of a two-dimensional gender identity model. In the model, masculinity and femininity were conceptualized as two separate and orthogonal dimensions, coexisting in varying degrees within an individual. This conceptualization on femininity and masculinity remains the accepted standard today.\n\nTwo instruments incorporating the multidimensional nature of masculinity and femininity have dominated gender identity research: The Bem Sex Role Inventory (BSRI) and the Personal Attributes Questionnaire (PAQ). Both instruments categorize individuals as either being sex typed (males report themselves as identifying primarily with masculine traits, females report themselves as identifying primarily with feminine traits), cross sex-typed (males report themselves as identifying primarily with feminine traits, females report themselves as identifying primarily with masculine traits), androgynous (either males or females who report themselves as high on both masculine and feminine traits) or undifferentiated (either males or females who report themselves as low on both masculine and feminine traits). Twenge (1997) noted that men are generally more masculine than women and women generally more feminine than men, but the association between biological sex and masculinity/femininity is waning.\n\nBiologist and feminist academic Anne Fausto-Sterling rejects the discourse of biological versus social determinism and advocates a deeper analysis of how interactions between the biological being and the social environment influence individuals' capacities. The philosopher and feminist Simone de Beauvoir applied existentialism to women's experience of life: \"One is not born a woman, one becomes one.\" In context, this is a philosophical statement. However, it may be analyzed in terms of biology—a girl must pass puberty to become a woman—and sociology, as a great deal of mature relating in social contexts is learned rather than instinctive.\n\nWithin feminist theory, terminology for gender issues developed over the 1970s. In the 1974 edition of \"Masculine/Feminine or Human\", the author uses \"innate gender\" and \"learned sex roles\", but in the 1978 edition, the use of \"sex\" and \"gender\" is reversed.\nBy 1980, most feminist writings had agreed on using \"gender\" only for socioculturally adapted traits.\n\nIn gender studies the term \"gender\" refers to proposed social and cultural constructions of masculinities and femininities. In this context, \"gender\" explicitly excludes reference to biological differences, to focus on cultural differences. This emerged from a number of different areas: in sociology during the 1950s; from the theories of the psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan; and in the work of French psychoanalysts like Julia Kristeva, Luce Irigaray, and American feminists such as Judith Butler. Those who followed Butler came to regard gender roles as a practice, sometimes referred to as \"performative\".\n\nCharles E. Hurst states that some people think sex will, \"...automatically determine one's gender demeanor and role (social) as well as one's sexual orientation (sexual attractions and behavior). Gender sociologists believe that people have cultural origins and habits for dealing with gender. For example, Michael Schwalbe believes that humans must be taught how to act appropriately in their designated gender to fill the role properly, and that the way people behave as masculine or feminine interacts with social expectations. Schwalbe comments that humans \"are the results of many people embracing and acting on similar ideas\". People do this through everything from clothing and hairstyle to relationship and employment choices. Schwalbe believes that these distinctions are important, because society wants to identify and categorize people as soon as we see them. They need to place people into distinct categories to know how we should feel about them.\n\nHurst comments that in a society where we present our genders so distinctly, there can often be severe consequences for breaking these cultural norms. Many of these consequences are rooted in discrimination based on sexual orientation. Gays and lesbians are often discriminated against in our legal system because of societal prejudices. Hurst describes how this discrimination works against people for breaking gender norms, no matter what their sexual orientation is. He says that \"courts often confuse sex, gender, and sexual orientation, and confuse them in a way that results in denying the rights not only of gays and lesbians, but also of those who do not present themselves or act in a manner traditionally expected of their sex\". This prejudice plays out in our legal system when a person is judged differently because they do not present themselves as the \"correct\" gender.\n\nAndrea Dworkin stated her \"commitment to destroying male dominance and gender itself\" while stating her belief in radical feminism.\n\nPolitical scientist Mary Hawkesworth addresses gender and feminist theory, stating that since the 1970s the concept of gender has transformed and been used in significantly different ways within feminist scholarship. She notes that a transition occurred when several feminist scholars, such as Sandra Harding and Joan Scott, began to conceive of gender \"as an analytic category within which humans think about and organize their social activity\". Feminist scholars in Political Science began employing gender as an analytical category, which highlighted \"social and political relations neglected by mainstream accounts\". However, Hawkesworth states \"feminist political science has not become a dominant paradigm within the discipline\".\n\nAmerican political scientist Karen Beckwith addresses the concept of gender within political science arguing that a \"common language of gender\" exists and that it must be explicitly articulated in order to build upon it within the political science discipline. Beckwith describes two ways in which the political scientist may employ 'gender' when conducting empirical research: \"gender as a category and as a process.\" Employing gender as a category allows for political scientists \"to delineate specific contexts where behaviours, actions, attitudes and preferences considered masculine or feminine result in particular\" political outcomes. It may also demonstrate how gender differences, not necessarily corresponding precisely with sex, may \"constrain or facilitate political\" actors. Gender as a process has two central manifestations in political science research, firstly in determining \"the differential effects of structures and policies upon men and women,\" and secondly, the ways in which masculine and feminine political actors \"actively work to produce favorable gendered outcomes\".\n\nWith regard to gender studies, Jacquetta Newman states that although sex is determined biologically, the ways in which people express gender is not. Gendering is a socially constructed process based on culture, though often cultural expectations around women and men have a direct relationship to their biology. Because of this, Newman argues, many privilege sex as being a cause of oppression and ignore other issues like race, ability, poverty, etc. Current gender studies classes seek to move away from that and examine the intersectionality of these factors in determining people's lives. She also points out that other non-Western cultures do not necessarily have the same views of gender and gender roles. Newman also debates the meaning of equality, which is often considered the goal of feminism; she believes that \"equality\" is a problematic term because it can mean many different things, such as people being treated identically, differently, or fairly based on their gender. Newman believes this is problematic because there is no unified definition as to what equality means or looks like, and that this can be significantly important in areas like public policy.\n\nSociologists generally regard gender as a social construct, and various researchers, including many feminists, consider sex to only be a matter of biology and something that is not about social or cultural construction. For instance, sexologist John Money suggests the distinction between biological sex and gender as a role. Moreover, Ann Oakley, a professor of sociology and social policy, says \"the constancy of sex must be admitted, but so also must the variability of gender.\" The World Health Organization states, \"'[s]ex' refers to the biological and physiological characteristics that define men and women,\" and \"'gender' refers to the socially constructed roles, behaviours, activities, and attributes that a given society considers appropriate for men and women.\" Thus, sex is regarded as a category studied in biology (natural sciences), while gender is studied in humanities and social sciences. Lynda Birke, a feminist biologist, maintains \"'biology' is not seen as something which might change.\" Therefore, it is stated that sex is something that does not change, while gender can change according to social structure.\n\nHowever, there are scholars who argue that sex is also socially constructed. For example, gender theorist Judith Butler states that \"perhaps this construct called 'sex' is as culturally constructed as gender; indeed, perhaps it was always already gender, with the consequence that the distinction between sex and gender turns out to be no distinction at all.\"\nShe continues:It would make no sense, then, to define gender as the cultural interpretation of sex, if sex is itself a gender-centered category. Gender should not be conceived merely as the cultural inscription of meaning based on a given sex (a juridical conception); gender must also designate the very apparatus of production whereby the sexes themselves are established. [...] This production of sex as the pre-discursive should be understood as the effect of the apparatus of cultural construction designated by gender.\n\nButler argues that \"bodies only appear, only endure, only live within the productive constraints of certain highly gendered regulatory schemas,\" and sex is \"no longer as a bodily given on which the construct of gender is artificially imposed, but as a cultural norm which governs the materialization of bodies.\" Marria Lugones states that, among the Yoruba people, there was no concept of gender and no gender system at all before colonialism. She argues that colonial powers used a gender system as a tool for domination and fundamentally changing social relations among the indigenous.\n\nWith regard to history, Linda Nicholson, a professor of history and women's studies, says that the notion of human bodies being separated into two sexes is not historically consistent. She argues that male and female genitals were considered inherently the same in Western society until the 18th century. At that time, female genitals were regarded as incomplete male genitals, and the difference between the two was conceived as a matter of degree. In other words, there was a gradation of physical forms, or a spectrum. Therefore, the current perspective toward sex, which is to consider women and men and their typical genitalia as the only possible natural options, came into existence through historical, not biological roots.\n\nIn addition, drawing from the empirical research of intersex children, Anne Fausto-Sterling, a professor of biology and gender studies, describes how the doctors address the issues of intersexuality. She starts her argument with an example of the birth of an intersexual individual and maintains \"our conceptions of the nature of gender difference shape, even as they reflect, the ways we structure our social system and polity; they also shape and reflect our understanding of our physical bodies.\" Then she adds how gender assumptions affects the scientific study of sex by presenting the research of intersexuals by John Money et al., and she concludes that \"they never questioned the fundamental assumption that there are only two sexes, because their goal in studying intersexuals was to find out more about 'normal' development.\" She also mentions the language the doctors use when they talk with the parents of the intersexuals. After describing how the doctors inform parents about the intersexuality, she asserts that because the doctors believe that the intersexuals are actually male or female, they tell the parents of the intersexuals that it will take a little bit more time for the doctors to determine whether the infant is a boy or a girl. That is to say, the doctors' behavior is formulated by the cultural gender assumption that there are only two sexes. Lastly, she maintains that the differences in the ways in which the medical professionals in different regions treat intersexual people also give us a good example of how sex is socially constructed. In her \"Sexing the body: gender politics and the construction of sexuality\", she introduces the following example: A group of physicians from Saudi Arabia recently reported on several cases of XX intersex children with congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), a genetically inherited malfunction of the enzymes that aid in making steroid hormones. [...] In the United States and Europe, such children, because they have the potential to bear children later in life, are usually raised as girls. Saudi doctors trained in this European tradition recommended such a course of action to the Saudi parents of CAH XX children. A number of parents, however, refused to accept the recommendation that their child, initially identified as a son, be raised instead as a daughter. Nor would they accept feminizing surgery for their child. [...] This was essentially an expression of local community attitudes with [...] the preference for male offspring.\n\nThus it may be said that determining the sex of children is actually a cultural act, and the sex of children is in fact socially constructed. Therefore, it is possible that although sex seems fixed and only related to biology, it may be actually deeply related to historical and social factors as well as biology and other natural sciences.\n\nAnother work of Ann Fausto-Sterling’s in which she discusses gender is \"The Five Sexes: Why Male and Female Are Not Enough.\" In this article, Fausto-Sterling states that Western culture has only two sexes and that even their language restricts the presence of more than two sexes. She argues that instead of having a binomial nomenclature for organizing humans into two distinct sexes (male and female), there are at least five sexes in the broad spectrum of gender. These five sexes include male, female, hermaphrodite, female pseudohermaphrodites (individuals who have ovaries and some male genitalia but lack testes), and male pseudohermaphrodites (individuals who have testes and some female genitalia but lack ovaries). Fausto-Sterling additionally adds that in the category of hermaphrodites, there are additional degrees and levels in which the genitalia are developed; this means that there may be more intersexes that exist in this continuum of gender.\n\nFausto-Sterling argues that sex has been gradually institutionally disciplined into a binary system through medical advances. She brings up multiple instances where gender in history was not split into strictly male or female, Fausto-Sterling mentioned that by the end of the Middle Age, intersex individuals were forced to pick a side in the binary gender code and to adhere by it. She then adds on that \"hermaphrodites have unruly bodies\" and they need to fit into society's definition of gender. Thus, modern-day parents have been urged by medical doctors to decide the sex for their hermaphroditic child immediately after childbirth. She emphasizes that the role of the medical community is that of an institutionalized discipline on society that there can only be two sexes: male and female and only the two listed are considered \"normal.\" Lastly, Fausto-Sterling argues that modern laws require humans to be labelled either as male or female and that \"ironically, a more sophisticated knowledge of the complexity of sexual systems has led to the repression of such intricacy.\" She mentions this quote to inform the prevailing thought that hermaphrodites, without medical intervention, are assumed to live a life full of psychological pain when in fact, there is no evidence in which that is the case. She finishes up her argument asking what would happen if society started accepting intersex individuals.\n\nThe article \"Adolescent Gender-Role Identity and Mental Health: Gender Intensification Revisited\" focuses on the work of Heather A. Priess, Sara M. Lindberg, and Janet Shibley Hyde on whether or not girls and boys diverge in their gender identities during adolescent years. The researchers based their work on ideas previously mentioned by Hill and Lynch in their gender intensification hypothesis in that signals and messages from parents determine and affect their children’s gender role identities. This hypothesis argues that parents affect their children's gender role identities and that different interactions spent with either parents will affect gender intensification. Priess and among other’s study did not support the hypothesis of Hill and Lynch which stated \"that as adolescents experience these and other socializing influences, they will become more stereotypical in their gender-role identities and gendered attitudes and behaviors.\" However, the researchers did state that perhaps the hypothesis Hill and Lynch proposed was true in the past but is not true now due to changes in the population of teens in respect to their gender-role identities.\n\nAuthors of \"Unpacking the Gender System: A Theoretical Perspective on Gender Belief’s and Social Relations\", Cecilia Ridgeway and Shelley Correll, argue that gender is more than an identity or role but is something that is institutionalized through \"social relational contexts.\" Ridgeway and Correll define \"social relational contexts\" as \"any situation in which individuals define themselves in relation to others in order to act.\" They also point out that in addition to social relational contexts, cultural beliefs plays a role in the gender system. The coauthors argue that daily people are forced to acknowledge and interact with others in ways that are related to gender. Every day, individuals are interacting with each other and comply with society's set standard of hegemonic beliefs, which includes gender roles. They state that society's hegemonic cultural beliefs sets the rules which in turn create the setting for which social relational contexts are to take place. Ridgeway and Correll then shift their topic towards sex categorization. The authors define sex categorization as \"the sociocognitive process by which we label another as male or female.\"\n\nGender, as identified through gender normative play, self-identification with a gender, and tendency to engage in aggressive behavior is influenced by prenatal hormone exposure. Studies on other gendered behavior are inconsistent, however some evidence indicates other gendered behavior is influenced by prenatal and early life androgen exposure. Males of most mammals, including humans, exhibit more rough and tumble play behavior, which is influenced by maternal testosterone levels. These levels may also influence sexuality, with non-heterosexual persons exhibiting sex atypical behavior in childhood.\n\nThe biology of gender became the subject of an expanding number of studies over the course of the late 20th century. One of the earliest areas of interest was what became known as \"gender identity disorder\" (GID) and which is now also described as gender dysphoria. Studies in this, and related areas, inform the following summary of the subject by John Money. He stated:\n\nMoney refers to attempts to distinguish a difference between biological sex and social gender as \"scientifically debased\", because of our increased knowledge of a continuum of dimorphic features (Money's word is \"dipolar\") that link biological and behavioral differences. These extend from the exclusively biological \"genetic\" and \"prenatal hormonal\" differences between men and women, to \"postnatal\" features, some of which are social, but others have been shown to result from \"post-pubertal hormonal\" effects.\n\nAlthough causation from the biological—genetic and hormonal—to the behavioral has been broadly demonstrated and accepted, Money is careful to also note that understanding of the causal chains from biology to behavior in sex and gender issues is very far from complete. For example, the existence of a \"gay gene\" has not been proven, but such a gene remains an acknowledged possibility.\n\nThere are studies concerning women who have a condition called congenital adrenal hyperplasia, which leads to the overproduction of the masculine sex hormone, androgen. These women usually have ordinary female appearances (though nearly all girls with congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) have corrective surgery performed on their genitals). However, despite taking hormone-balancing medication given to them at birth, these females are statistically more likely to be interested in activities traditionally linked to males than female activities. Psychology professor and CAH researcher Dr. Sheri Berenbaum attributes these differences to an exposure of higher levels of male sex hormones in utero.\n\nSexual reproduction is a common method of producing a new individual within various species. In sexually reproducing species, individuals produce special kinds of cells (called \"gametes\") whose function is specifically to fuse with one \"unlike\" gamete and thereby to form a new individual. This fusion of two unlike gametes is called fertilization. By convention, where one type of gamete cell is physically larger than the other, it is associated with female sex. Thus an individual that produces exclusively large gametes (ova in humans) is called \"female\", and one that produces exclusively small gametes (spermatozoa in humans) is called \"male\".\n\nAn individual that produces both types of gametes is called \"hermaphrodite\" (a name applicable also to people with one testis and one ovary). In some species hermaphrodites can self-fertilize (see Selfing), in others they can achieve fertilization with females, males or both. Some species, like the Japanese Ash, \"Fraxinus lanuginosa\", only have males and hermaphrodites, a rare reproductive system called \"androdioecy\". Gynodioecy is also found in several species. Human hermaphrodites are typically, but not always, infertile.\n\nWhat is considered defining of sexual reproduction is the \"difference\" between the gametes and the \"binary\" nature of fertilization. Multiplicity of gamete \"types\" within a species would still be considered a form of sexual reproduction. However, of more than 1.5 million living species,\nrecorded up to about the year 2000, \"no third sex cell—and so no third sex—has appeared in multi-cellular animals.\" Why sexual reproduction has an exclusively binary gamete system is not yet known. A few rare species that push the boundaries of the definitions are the subject of active research for light they may shed on the mechanisms of the evolution of sex. For example, the most toxic insect, the harvester ant \"Pogonomyrmex\", has two kinds of female and two kinds of male. One hypothesis is that the species is a hybrid, evolved from two closely related preceding species.\n\nFossil records indicate that sexual reproduction has been occurring for at least one billion years.\nHowever, the reason for the initial evolution of sex, and the reason it has survived to the present are still matters of debate, there are many plausible theories. It appears that the ability to reproduce sexually has evolved independently in various species on many occasions. There are cases where it has also been lost, notably among the Fungi Imperfecti.\nThe blacktip shark (\"Carcharhinus limbatus\"), flatworm (\"Dugesia tigrina\") and some other species can reproduce either sexually or asexually depending on various conditions.\n\nThe following systematic list gender taxonomy illustrates the kinds of diversity that have been studied and reported in medical literature. It is placed in roughly chronological order of biological and social development in the human life cycle. The earlier stages are more purely biological and the latter are more dominantly social. Causation is known to operate from chromosome to gonads, and from gonads to hormones. It is also significant from brain structure to gender identity (see Money quote above). Brain structure and processing (biological) that may explain erotic preference (social), however, is an area of ongoing research. Terminology in some areas changes quite rapidly as knowledge grows.\n\n\nAlthough sexual reproduction is \"defined\" at the cellular level, key features of sexual reproduction operate \"within\" the structures of the gamete cells themselves. Notably, gametes carry very long molecules called DNA that the biological processes of reproduction can \"read\" like a book of instructions. In fact, there are typically many of these \"books\", called \"chromosomes\". Human gametes usually have 23 chromosomes, 22 of which are common to both sexes. The final chromosomes in the two human gametes are called \"sex\" chromosomes because of their role in sex determination. Ova always have the same sex chromosome, labelled \"X\". About half of spermatozoa also have this same X chromosome, the rest have a Y-chromosome. At fertilization the gametes fuse to form a cell, usually with 46 chromosomes, and either XX female or XY male, depending on whether the sperm carried an X or a Y chromosome. Some of the other possibilities are listed above. \n\nGenes which are specific to the X or Y chromosome are called sex-linked genes. For example, the genes which create red and green retinal photoreceptors are located on the X chromosome, which men only have one of. Thus red-green color blindness is an X-linked recessive trait and is much more common in men. However, sex-limited genes on \"any\" chromosome can be expressed and \"say\", for example, \"\"if\" you are in a male body do X, otherwise do not.\"\n\nThe human XY system is not the only sex determination system. Birds typically have a reverse, ZW system—males are ZZ and females ZW. Whether male or female birds influence the sex of offspring is not known for all species. Several species of butterfly are known to have female parent sex determination.\n\nThe platypus has a complex hybrid system, the male has ten sex chromosomes, half X and half Y.\n\n\"It is well established that men have a larger cerebrum than women by about 8–10% (Filipek et al., 1994; Nopoulos et al.,\n2000; Passe et al., 1997a,b; Rabinowicz et al., 1999; Witelson et al., 1995).\"\nHowever, what is functionally relevant are differences in composition and \"wiring\". Richard J. Haier and colleagues at the universities of New Mexico and California (Irvine) found, using brain mapping, that men have more grey matter related to general intelligence than women, and women have more white matter related to intelligence than men – the ratio between grey and white matter is 4% higher for men than women.\n\nGrey matter is used for information processing, while white matter consists of the connections between processing centers. Other differences are measurable but less pronounced.\nMost of these differences are produced by hormonal activity, ultimately derived from the Y chromosome and sexual differentiation. However, differences that arise directly from gene activity have also been observed.\n\nIt has also been demonstrated that brain processing responds to the external environment. Learning, both of ideas and behaviors, appears to be coded in brain processes. It also appears that in several simplified cases this coding operates differently, but in some ways equivalently, in the brains of men and women. For example, both men and women learn and use language; however, bio-chemically, they appear to process it differently. Differences in female and male use of language are likely reflections \"both\" of biological preferences and aptitudes, \"and\" of learned patterns.\n\nGender studies is a field of interdisciplinary study and academic field devoted to gender, gender identity and gendered representation as central categories of analysis. This field includes Women's studies (concerning women, feminity, their gender roles and politics, and feminism), Men's studies (concerning men, masculinity, their gender roles, and politics), and LGBT studies.\nSometimes Gender studies is offered together with Study of Sexuality.\nThese disciplines study gender and sexuality in the fields of literature and language, history, political science, sociology, anthropology, cinema and media studies, human development, law, and medicine.\nIt also analyses race, ethnicity, location, nationality, and disability.\n\nMany of the more complicated human behaviors are influenced by both innate factors and by environmental ones, which include everything from genes, gene expression, and body chemistry, through diet and social pressures. A large area of research in behavioral psychology collates evidence in an effort to discover correlations between behavior and various possible antecedents such as genetics, gene regulation, access to food and vitamins, culture, gender, hormones, physical and social development, and physical and social environments.\n\nA core research area within sociology is the way human behavior operates on \"itself\", in other words, how the behavior of one group or individual influences the behavior of other groups or individuals. Starting in the late 20th century, the feminist movement has contributed extensive study of gender and theories about it, notably within sociology but not restricted to it.\nSocial theorists have sought to determine the specific nature of gender in relation to biological sex and sexuality, with the result being that culturally established gender and sex have become interchangeable identifications that signify the allocation of a specific 'biological' sex within a categorical gender. The second wave feminist view that gender is socially constructed and hegemonic in all societies, remains current in some literary theoretical circles, Kira Hall and Mary Bucholtz publishing new perspectives as recently as 2008.\n\nContemporary socialisation theory proposes the notion that when a child is first born it has a biological sex but no social gender. As the child grows, \"...society provides a string of prescriptions, templates, or models of behaviors appropriate to the one sex or the other,\" which socialises the child into belonging to a culturally specific gender. There is huge incentive for a child to concede to their socialisation with gender shaping the individual’s opportunities for education, work, family, sexuality, reproduction, authority, and to make an impact on the production of culture and knowledge. Adults who do not perform these ascribed roles are perceived from this perspective as deviant and improperly socialized.\n\nSome believe society is constructed in a way that splits gender into a dichotomy via social organisations that constantly invent and reproduce cultural images of gender. Joan Acker believes gendering occurs in at least five different interacting social processes:\n\n\nLooking at gender through a Foucauldian lens, gender is transfigured into a vehicle for the social division of power. Gender difference is merely a construct of society used to enforce the distinctions made between what is assumed to be female and male, and allow for the domination of masculinity over femininity through the attribution of specific gender-related characteristics. \"The idea that men and women are more different from one another than either is from anything else, must come from something other than nature… far from being an expression of natural differences, exclusive gender identity is the suppression of natural similarities.\"\n\nGender conventions play a large role in attributing masculine and feminine characteristics to a fundamental biological sex. Socio-cultural codes and conventions, the rules by which society functions, and which are both a creation of society as well as a constituting element of it, determine the allocation of these specific traits to the sexes. These traits provide the foundations for the creation of hegemonic gender difference. It follows then, that gender can be assumed as the acquisition and internalisation of social norms. Individuals are therefore socialized through their receipt of society’s expectations of 'acceptable' gender attributes that are flaunted within institutions such as the family, the state and the media. Such a notion of 'gender' then becomes naturalized into a person’s sense of self or identity, effectively imposing a gendered social category upon a sexed body.\n\nThe conception that people are gendered rather than sexed also coincides with Judith Butler’s theories of gender performativity. Butler argues that gender is not an expression of what one is, but rather something that one does. It follows then, that if gender is acted out in a repetitive manner it is in fact re-creating and effectively embedding itself within the social consciousness. Contemporary sociological reference to male and female gender roles typically uses \"masculinities\" and \"femininities\" in the plural rather than singular, suggesting diversity both within cultures as well as across them.\n\nThe difference between the sociological and popular definitions of gender involve a different dichotomy and focus. For example, the sociological approach to \"gender\" (social roles: female versus male) focuses on the difference in (economic/power) position between a male CEO (disregarding the fact that he is heterosexual or homosexual) to female workers in his employ (disregarding whether they are straight or gay). However the popular sexual self-conception approach (self-conception: gay versus straight) focuses on the different self-conceptions and social conceptions of those who are gay/straight, in comparison with those who are straight (disregarding what might be vastly differing economic and power positions between female and male groups in each category). There is then, in relation to definition of and approaches to \"gender\", a tension between historic feminist sociology and contemporary homosexual sociology.\n\nA person's sex as male or female has legal significance—sex is indicated on government documents, and laws provide differently for men and women. Many pension systems have different retirement ages for men or women. Marriage is usually only available to opposite-sex couples; in some countries and jurisdictions there are same-sex marriage laws.\n\nThe question then arises as to what legally determines whether someone is female or male. In most cases this can appear obvious, but the matter is complicated for intersex or transgender people. Different jurisdictions have adopted different answers to this question. Almost all countries permit changes of legal gender status in cases of intersexualism, when the gender assignment made at birth is determined upon further investigation to be biologically inaccurate—technically, however, this is not a change of status \"per se\". Rather, it is recognition of a status deemed to exist but unknown from birth. Increasingly, jurisdictions also provide a procedure for changes of legal gender for transgender people.\n\nGender assignment, when there are indications that genital sex might not be decisive in a particular case, is normally not defined by a single definition, but by a combination of conditions, including chromosomes and gonads. Thus, for example, in many jurisdictions a person with XY chromosomes but female gonads could be recognized as female at birth.\n\nThe ability to change legal gender for transgender people in particular has given rise to the phenomena in some jurisdictions of the same person having different genders for the purposes of different areas of the law. For example, in Australia prior to the Re Kevin decisions, transsexual people could be recognized as having the genders they identified with under many areas of the law, including social security law, but not for the law of marriage. Thus, for a period, it was possible for the same person to have two different genders under Australian law.\n\nIt is also possible in federal systems for the same person to have one gender under state law and a different gender under federal law.\n\nFor intersex people, who according to the UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, \"do not fit typical binary notions of male or female bodies\", access to any form of identification document with a gender marker may be an issue. For other intersex people, there may be issues in securing the same rights as other individuals assigned male or female; other intersex people may seek non-binary gender recognition.\n\nSome countries now legally recognize non-binary or third genders, including Canada, Germany, Australia, and India. In the United States, Oregon, California, and the District of Columbia legally recognize non-binary gender.\n\nNatural languages often make gender distinctions. These may be of various kinds, more or less loosely associated by analogy with various actual or perceived differences between men and women. Some grammatical gender systems go beyond, or ignore, the masculine-feminine distinction.\n\nHistorically, science has been portrayed as a masculine pursuit in which women have faced significant barriers to participate. Even after universities began admitting women in the 19th century, women were still largely relegated to certain scientific fields, such as home science, nursing, and child psychology. Women were also typically given tedious, low-paying jobs and denied opportunities for career advancement. This was often justified by the stereotype that women were naturally more suited to jobs that required concentration, patience, and dexterity, rather than creativity, leadership, or intellect. Although these stereotypes have been dispelled in modern times, women are still underrepresented in prestigious \"hard science\" fields such as physics, and are less likely to hold high-ranking positions.\n\nThis topic includes internal and external religious issues such as gender of God and deities creation myths about human gender, roles and rights (for instance, leadership roles especially ordination of women, sex segregation, gender equality, marriage, abortion, homosexuality)\n\nAccording to Kati Niemelä of the Church Research Institute, women are universally more religious than men. They believe that the difference in religiousity between genders is due to biological differences, for instance usually people seeking security in life are more religious, and as men are considered to be greater risk takers than women, they are less religious. Although religious fanaticism is more often seen in men than women.\nIn Taoism, yin and yang are considered feminine and masculine, respectively. The Taijitu and concept of the Zhou period reach into family and gender relations. Yin is female and yang is male. They fit together as two parts of a whole.\nThe male principle was equated with the sun: active, bright, and shining; the female principle corresponds to the moon: passive, shaded, and reflective. Male toughness was balanced by female gentleness, male action and initiative by female endurance and need for completion, and male leadership by female supportiveness.\n\nIn Judaism, God is traditionally described in the masculine, but in the mystical tradition of the Kabbalah, the Shekhinah represents the feminine aspect of God's essence. However, Judaism traditionally holds that God is completely non-corporeal, and thus neither male nor female. Conceptions of the gender of God notwithstanding, traditional Judaism places a strong emphasis on individuals following Judaism's traditional gender roles, though many modern denominations of Judaism strive for greater egalitarianism. As well, traditional Jewish culture dictates that there are six genders.\n\nIn Christianity, God is traditionally described in masculine terms and the Church has historically been described in feminine terms. On the other hand, Christian theology in many churches distinguishes between the masculine images used of God (Father, King, God the Son) and the reality they signify, which transcends gender, embodies all the virtues of both men and women perfectly, which may be seen through the doctrine of Imago Dei. In the New Testament, Jesus at several times mentions with the masculine pronoun i.e. John 15:26 among other verses. Hence, the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit (i.e. Trinity) are all mentioned with the masculine pronoun; though the exact meaning of the masculinity of the Christian triune God is contended.\n\nIn Hinduism\n\nIn a number of North American Indigenous cultures, non-man/-woman individuals sometimes carried specific roles within that nation's religious structures. These could be the Lakota wíŋkte, Navajo nadleehí, Anishinaabe niizh manidoowag and hundreds more. Recently, North American Native Americans and First Nations have adopted the term Two-Spirit to refer to the mosaic of different genders cross-culturally.\n\nGender inequality is most common in women dealing with poverty. Many women must shoulder all the responsibility of the household because they must take care of the family. Oftentimes this may include tasks such as tilling land, grinding grain, carrying water and cooking. Also, women are more likely to earn low incomes because of gender discrimination, as men are more likely to receive higher pay, have more opportunities, and have overall more political and social capital then women. Approximately 75% of world's women are unable to obtain bank loans because they have unstable jobs. It shows that there are many women in the world's population but only a few represent world's wealth. In many countries, the financial sector largely neglects women even though they play an important role in the economy, as Nena Stoiljkovic pointed out in \"D+C Development and Cooperation\". In 1978 Diana M. Pearce coined the term feminization of poverty to describe the problem of women having higher rates of poverty. Women are more vulnerable to chronic poverty because of gender inequalities in the distribution of income, property ownership, credit, and control over earned income. Resource allocation is typically gender-biased within households, and continue on a higher level regarding state institutions.\n\nGender and Development (GAD) is a holistic approach to give aid to countries where gender inequality has a great effect of not improving the social and economic development. It is a program focused on the gender development of women to empower them and decrease the level of inequality between men and women.\n\nThe largest discrimination study of the transgender community, conducted in 2013, found that the transgender community is four times more likely to live in extreme poverty (income of less than $10,000 a year) than people who are cisgender (not transgender).\n\nAccording to general strain theory, studies suggest that gender differences between individuals can lead to externalized anger that may result in violent outbursts. These violent actions related to gender inequality can be measured by comparing violent neighborhoods to non-violent neighborhoods. By noticing the independent variables (neighborhood violence) and the dependent variable (individual violence), it's possible to analyze gender roles. The strain in the general strain theory is the removal of a positive stimulus and or the introduction of a negative stimulus, which would create a negative effect (strain) within individual, which is either inner-directed (depression/guilt) or outer-directed (anger/frustration), which depends on whether the individual blames themselves or their environment. Studies reveal that even though males and females are equally likely to react to a strain with anger, the origin of the anger and their means of coping with it can vary drastically. Males are likely to put the blame on others for adversity and therefore externalize feelings of anger. Females typically internalize their angers and tend to blame themselves instead. Female internalized anger is accompanied by feelings of guilt, fear, anxiety and depression. Women view anger as a sign that they've somehow lost control, and thus worry that this anger may lead them to harm others and/or damage relationships. On the other end of the spectrum, men are less concerned with damaging relationships and more focused on using anger as a means of affirming their masculinity. According to the general strain theory, men would more likely engage in aggressive behavior directed towards others due to externalized anger whereas women would direct their anger towards themselves rather than others.\n\nGender, and particularly the role of women is widely recognized as vitally important to international development issues. This often means a focus on gender-equality, ensuring participation, but includes an understanding of the different roles and expectation of the genders within the community.\n\nIn modern times, the study of gender and development has become a broad field that involves politicians, economists, and human rights activists. Gender and Development, unlike previous theories concerning women in development, includes a broader view of the effects of development on gender including economic, political, and social issues. The theory takes a holistic approach to development and its effects on women and recognizes the negative effects gender blind development policies have had on women. Prior to 1970, it was believed that development affected men and women in the same way and no gendered perspective existed for development studies. However, the 1970s saw a transformation in development theory that sought to incorporate women into existing development paradigms.\n\nWhen Ester Boserup published her book, \"Woman’s Role in Economic Development\", there was a realization that development affected men and women differently and there began to be more of a focus on women and development. Boserup argued that women were marginalized in the modernization process and practices of growth, development, and development policy threatened to actually make women worse off.\nBoserup’s work translated into the beginning of a larger discourse termed Women in Development (WID) coined by the Women’s Committee of the Washington DC Chapter of the Society for International Development, a network of female development professionals. The primary goal of WID was to include women into existing development initiatives, since it was argued that women were marginalized and excluded from the benefits of development. In so doing, the WID approach pointed out that the major problem to women’s unequal representation and participation were male biased and patriarchal development policies. In short, the WID approach blamed patriarchy, which did not consider women’s productive and reproductive work. In fact, women were tied to domestic work hence were almost invisible in development programs. The WID approach, however, began to gain criticism as ignoring how women’s economic marginalization was linked to the development model itself.\n\nSome feminists argued that the key concept for women and development should be subordination in the context of new capitalist forms of insecure and hierarchical job structures, rather than marginalization as WID approaches emphasized. The rise of criticism against the WID approach led to the emergence of a new theory, that of Women and Development (WAD).\n\nHowever, just as WID had its critics, so did WAD. Critics of WAD argued that it failed to sufficiently address the differential power relations between women and men, and tended to overemphasize women’s productive as opposed to reproductive roles. Also, rising criticism of the exclusion of men in WID and WAD led to a new theory termed Gender and Development (GAD). Drawing from insights developed in psychology, sociology, and gender studies, GAD theorists shifted from understanding women’s problems as based on their sex (i.e. their biological differences from men) to understanding them as based on gender – the social relations between women and men, their social construction, and how women have been systematically subordinated in this relationship.\n\nAt their most fundamental, GAD perspectives link the social relations of production with the social relations of reproduction – exploring why and how women and men are assigned to different roles and responsibilities in society, how these dynamics are reflected in social, economic, and political theories and institutions, and how these relationships affect development policy effectiveness. According to proponents of GAD, women are cast not as passive recipients of development aid, but rather as active agents of change whose empowerment should be a central goal of development policy. In contemporary times, most literature and institutions that are concerned with women's role in development incorporate a GAD perspective, with the United Nations taking the lead of mainstreaming the GAD approach through its system and development policies.\n\nResearchers at the Overseas Development Institute have highlighted that policy dialogue on the Millennium Development Goals needs to recognize that the gender dynamics of power, poverty, vulnerability and care link all the goals.\nThe various United Nations international women’s conferences in Beijing, Mexico City, Copenhagen, and Nairobi, as well as the development of the Millennium Development Goals in 2000 have taken a GAD approach and holistic view of development. The United Nations Millennium Declaration signed at the United Nations Millennium Summit in 2000 including eight goals that were to be reached by 2015, and although it would be a difficult task to reach them, all of them could be monitored. The eight goals are:\n\nThe MDGs have three goals specifically focused on women: Goal 3, 4 and 5 but women’s issues also cut across all of the goals. These goals overall comprise all aspects of women’s lives including economic, health, and political participation.\n\nGender equality is also strongly linked to education. The Dakar Framework for Action (2000) set out ambitious goals: to eliminate gender disparities in primary and secondary education by 2005, and to achieve gender equality in education by 2015. The focus was on ensuring girls’ full and equal access to and achievement in good quality basic education. The gender objective of the Dakar Framework for Action is somewhat different from the MDG Goal 3 (Target 1): \"Eliminate gender disparity in primary and secondary education, preferably by 2005, and in all levels of education no later than 2015\". MDG Goal 3 does not comprise a reference to learner achievement and good quality basic education, but goes beyond the school level. Studies demonstrate the positive impact of girls’ education on child and maternal health, fertility rates, poverty reduction and economic growth. Educated mothers are more likely to send their children to school.\n\nSome organizations working in developing countries and in the development field have incorporated advocacy and empowerment for women into their work. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) adopted a 10-year strategic framework in November 2009 that includes the strategic objective of gender equity in access to resources, goods, services and decision-making in rural areas, and mainstreams gender equity in all FAO's programs for agriculture and rural development. The Association for Progressive Communications (APC) has developed a Gender Evaluation Methodology for planning and evaluating development projects to ensure they benefit all sectors of society including women.\n\nThe Gender-related Development Index (GDI), developed by the United Nations, aims to show the inequalities between men and women in the following areas: long and healthy life, knowledge, and a decent standard of living. The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) has introduced indicators designed to add a gendered dimension to the Human Development Index (HDI). Additionally, in 1995, the Gender-related Development Index (GDI) and the Gender Empowerment Measure (GEM) were introduced. More recently, in 2010, UNDP introduced a new indicator, the Gender Inequality Index (GII), which was designed to be a better measurement of gender inequality and to improve the shortcomings of GDI and GEM.\n\nGender is a topic of increasing concern within climate change policy and science. Generally, gender approaches to climate change address gender- differentiated consequences of climate change, as well as unequal adaptation capacities and gendered contribution to climate change. Furthermore, the intersection of climate change and gender raises questions regarding the complex and intersecting power relations arising from it. These differences, however, are mostly not due to biological or physical differences, but are formed by the social, institutional and legal context. Subsequently, vulnerability is less an intrinsic feature of women and girls but rather a product of their marginalization.\nRoehr notes that, while the United Nations officially committed to gender mainstreaming, in practice gender equality is not reached in the context of climate change policies. This is reflected in the fact that discourses of and negotiations over climate change are mostly dominated by men.\nSome feminist scholars hold that the debate on climate change is not only dominated by men but also primarily shaped in ‘masculine’ principles, which limits discussions about climate change to a perspective that focuses on technical solutions. This perception of climate change hides subjectivity and power relations that actually condition climate-change policy and science, leading to a phenomenon that Tuana terms ‘epistemic injustice’.\nSimilarly, MacGregor attests that by framing climate change as an issue of ‘hard’ natural scientific conduct and natural security, it is kept within the traditional domains of hegemonic masculinity.\n\nGender roles and stereotypes have slowly started to change in society within the past few decades. These changes occur mostly in communication, but more specifically during social interactions. The ways people communicate and socialize have also started to change alongside advancement in technology. One of the biggest reasons for this change is due to social media.\n\nOver the past few years, the use of social media globally has started to rise. This rise can be contributed to the abundance of technology available for use among youth. Recent studies suggest that men and women value and use technology differently. Forbes published an article in 2010 that reported 57% of Facebook users are women, which attributed to the fact that women are more active on social media, because on average women have 8% more friends and account for 62% of posts that are shared via Facebook. Another study in 2010 found that in most Western cultures, women spend more time sending text messages compared to men as well as spend more time on social networking sites as a way to communicate with friends and family. Hayat, Lesser and Samuel-Azran (2017) have further shown that while men write more posts in social networking sites, women commented on other people's posts more often. They further showed that women's posts enjoyed higher popularity than men's post\"s.\"\n\nSocial media is more than just the communication of words. With social media increasing in popularity, pictures have become a large role in how many people communicate. Research conducted in 2013 found that over 57% of pictures posted on social networking sites were sexual and were created to gain attention. More shockingly, 58% of women and 45% of men don't look into the camera, which is creating an illusion of withdrawal. Other factors to be considered are the poses in pictures such as women laying down in subordinate positions or even touching themselves in child like ways. In conclusion, research has found that images shared online through social networking sites help establish personal self-reflections that individuals want to share with the world.\n\nAccording to recent research, gender plays a strong role in structuring our social lives, especially since society assigns and creates \"male\" and \"female\" categories. Individuals in society might be able to learn the similarities between gender rather than the differences. Until then, gender will never truly be equal, which is a problem. Social media helps create more equality, because every individual is able to express him or herself however they like. Every individual also has the right to express their opinion, even though some might disagree, but it still gives each gender an equal amount of power to be heard.\n\nYoung adults in the U.S. frequently use social networking sites as a way to connect and communicate with one another, as well as to satisfy their curiosity. Adolescent girls generally use social networking sites as a tool to communicate with peers and reinforce existing relationships; boys on the other hand tend to use social networking sites as a tool to meet new friends and acquaintances. More importantly, social networking sites have allowed individuals to truly express themselves, as they are able to create an identity and socialize with other individuals that can relate. Social networking sites have also given individuals access to create a space where they feel more comfortable about their sexuality. Recent research has indicated that social media is becoming a stronger part of younger individuals media culture, as more intimate stories are being told via social media and are being intertwined with gender, sexuality, and relationships.\n\nTeens are avid internet and social media users in the United States. Research has found that almost all U.S. teens (95%) aged 12 through 17 are online, compared to only 78% of adults. Of these teens, 80% have profiles on social media sites, as compared to only 64% of the online population aged 30 and older. According to a study conducted by the Kaiser Family Foundation, 11-to-18 year olds spend – on average – over one and a half hours a day using a computer and 27 minutes per day visiting social network sites, which accounts for more than one fourth of their daily computer use.\n\nTeen girls and boys differ in what they post in their online profiles. Studies have shown that female users tend to post more \"cute\" pictures, while male participants were more likely to post pictures of them doing action activities. Women in the U.S. also tend to post more pictures of friends, while boys tend to post more about sports and humorous links. The study also found that males would post more alcohol and sexual references. The roles were reversed however, when looking at a teenage dating site. Women referred to sexual references significantly more than males.\n\nBoys share more personal information, like their hometown and phone number. While girls are more conservative about the personal information they allow to go public on these social networking sites. Boys, meanwhile, are more likely to orient towards technology, sports, and humor in the information they post to their profile.\n\nSocial media goes beyond the role of helping individuals express themselves, as it has grown to help individuals create relationships, particularly romantic relationships. A large amount of social media users have found it easier to create relationships in a less direct approach, compared to the traditional approach of awkwardly asking for someone's number.\n\nSocial media plays a big role when it comes to communication between genders. Therefore, it's important to understand how gender stereotypes develop during online interactions. Research in the 1990s suggested that different genders display certain traits such as being active, attractive, dependent, dominant, independent, sentimental, sexy, and submissive when it comes to online interaction. Even though these traits continue to be displayed through gender stereotypes, recent studies show that this isn't necessarily the case anymore.\n\n\n", "id": "38076", "title": "Gender"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23420193", "text": "Macrobiology\n\nMacrobiology is the branch of biology that studies large living organisms (termed Macro organisms) that can be seen by the naked eye. Macrobiology is the opposite of Microbiology.\n\nMacrocosm and Microcosm\n\nMacrocosm and Microcosm is an important concept in Macrobiology. It refers to a vision of cosmos where the part reflects the whole (macrocosm) and vice versa. It is a feature \"present in all esoteric schools of thinking\", according to scholar Pierre A. Riffard. It underlies practices such as astrology, alchemy and sacred geometry.\n\n", "id": "23420193", "title": "Macrobiology"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51529881", "text": "Nuclear calcium\n\nThe concentration of calcium in the cell nucleus can increase in response to signals from the environment. Nuclear calcium is an evolutionary conserved potent regulator of gene expression that allows cells to undergo long-lasting adaptive responses. The 'Nuclear Calcium Hypothesis’ by Hilmar Bading describes nuclear calcium in neurons as an important signaling end-point in synapse-to-nucleus communication that activates gene expression programs needed for persistent adaptations. In the nervous system, nuclear calcium is required for long-term memory formation, acquired neuroprotection, and the development of chronic inflammatory pain. In the heart, nuclear calcium is important for the development of cardiac hypertrophy. In the immune system, nuclear calcium is required for human T cell activation. Plants use nuclear calcium to control symbiosis signaling.\n", "id": "51529881", "title": "Nuclear calcium"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51529492", "text": "Acquired neuroprotection\n\nAcquired neuroprotection is a synaptic-activity-dependent form of adaptation in the nervous system that renders neurons more resistant to harmful conditions. The term was coined by Hilmar Bading. This use-dependent enhancement of cellular survival activity requires changes in gene expression triggered by neuronal activity and nuclear calcium signaling. In rodents, components of the neuroprotective gene program can reduce brain damage caused by seizure-like activity or by a stroke. In acute and chronic neurodegenerative diseases, gene regulatory events important for acquired neuroprotection are antagonized by extrasynaptic NMDA receptor signaling leading to increased vulnerability, loss of structural integrity, and bioenergetics dysfunction.\n", "id": "51529492", "title": "Acquired neuroprotection"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52240704", "text": "Transboundary breed\n\nA transboundary breed is a breed which is present in several countries. Transboundary species of the five significant livestock types (cattle, sheep, goats, pigs and chickens), have been developed for a hundred years or more in intensive manufacturing systems, which has led to global availability. A relatively small number of worldwide transboundary breeds compose the ever-increasing share of total global animal products. However, only in North America and the Southwest Pacific do the number of transboundary breeds surpass that of local breeds. \n\nThere can be both regional and international types of transboundary breeds. Regional breeds are breeds that are reported to only be found in one \"region\", which may include several countries, and an international transboundary breed is one that is reported to be found in multiple regions. For example, the Holstein Fresian cattle is an international transboundary breed, because it is found in several different continents and regions.\n", "id": "52240704", "title": "Transboundary breed"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52335682", "text": "Solenocyte\n\nIn biology, Solenocytes are flagellated cells associated with excretion, osmoregulation and ionoregulation in many non-chordates and in some chordates under the sub-phylum Cephalochordata of the sub-group Protochordata.\n\nThese are the cells which form subtypes of Protonephridium along with the other type i.e. Flame Cells. Flame cells can be distinguished from solenocytes as the former is usually ciliated whereas the latter is flagellated.\n\nAn example of organisms in which excretion is performed by Solenocytic protonephridia is Genus \"Branchiostoma.\"\n", "id": "52335682", "title": "Solenocyte"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42900237", "text": "Genomics data sharing\n\nGenomics research data is the type of data generated from human genomics research. This data may be either the output of academic research or a result of research in industry, for example from clinical trials in the pharmaceutical industry.\n\nSharing of human genomics data has challenges similar to the issues related to sharing of health data and the handling, managing and sharing of the data must be in accordance with patient consent. \n\nStandardisation of annotation vocabularies is important for sharing data in an interoperable fashion, the gene ontology is an open standard enabling linking and access to different data sources via a shared vocabulary. Data annotated with a OWL ontology like the gene ontology and marked up using RDF can be queried in a unified way, effectively providing a standardised, machine readable API.\n\nHere are some examples of data formats used in regards to genomics \n\n\nThere are a number of genomic data resources already in existence and some larger scale projects planned in the next 3 to 5 years. Many of the existing projects are not publicly available but only available through request for academics or researchers. Examples of current genomics projects include People of the British Isles and the International HapMap project. Some larger scale project are being developed by governments prospecting that large genomic databases will be valuable resources for health science and pharmaceuticals. Such large scale projects are planned in the UK (100 thousand genomes project) and The Qatar Genome Project. As these large scale projects progress issues of data sharing will become more poignant.\n\nBiological data\n\nMetadata\n", "id": "42900237", "title": "Genomics data sharing"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=411782", "text": "Staining\n\nStaining is an auxiliary technique used in microscopy to enhance contrast in the microscopic image. Stains and dyes are frequently used in biology and medicine to highlight structures in biological tissues for viewing, often with the aid of different microscopes. Stains may be used to define and examine bulk tissues (highlighting, for example, muscle fibers or connective tissue), cell populations (classifying different blood cells, for instance), or organelles within individual cells.\n\nIn biochemistry it involves adding a class-specific (DNA, proteins, lipids, carbohydrates) dye to a substrate to qualify or quantify the presence of a specific compound. Staining and fluorescent tagging can serve similar purposes. Biological staining is also used to mark cells in flow cytometry, and to flag proteins or nucleic acids in gel electrophoresis.\n\nSimple staining is staining with only one stain/dye. There are various kinds of multiple staining, many of which are examples of counterstaining, differential staining, or both, including double staining and triple staining.\n\nStaining is not limited to biological materials, it can also be used to study the morphology of other materials for example the lamellar structures of semi-crystalline polymers or the domain structures of block copolymers.\n\n\"In vivo\" staining (also called vital staining or intravital staining) is the process of dyeing living tissues—\"in vivo\" means \"in life\" (compare with \"in vitro\" staining). By causing certain cells or structures to take on contrasting colour(s), their form (morphology) or position within a cell or tissue can be readily seen and studied. The usual purpose is to reveal cytological details that might otherwise not be apparent; however, staining can also reveal where certain chemicals or specific chemical reactions are taking place within cells or tissues.\n\n\"In vitro\" staining involves colouring cells or structures that have been removed from their biological context. Certain stains are often combined to reveal more details and features than a single stain alone. Combined with specific protocols for fixation and sample preparation, scientists and physicians can use these standard techniques as consistent, repeatable diagnostic tools. A counterstain is stain that makes cells or structures more visible, when not completely visible with the principal stain.\n\nWhile ex vivo, many cells continue to live and metabolize until they are \"fixed\". Some staining methods are based on this property. Those stains excluded by the living cells but taken up by the already dead cells are called vital stains (e.g. trypan blue or propidium iodide for eukaryotic cells). Those that enter and stain living cells are called supravital stains (e.g. New Methylene Blue and Brilliant Cresyl Blue for reticulocyte staining). However, these stains are eventually toxic to the organism, some more so than others. Partly due to their toxic interaction inside a living cell, when supravital stains enter a living cell, they might produce a characteristic pattern of staining different from the staining of an already fixed cell (e.g. \"reticulocyte\" look versus diffuse \"polychromasia\"). To achieve desired effects, the stains are used in very dilute solutions ranging from to (Howey, 2000). Note that many stains may be used in both living and fixed cells.\n\nThe preparatory steps involved depend on the type of analysis planned; some or all of the following procedures may be required. \n\nFixation–which may itself consist of several steps–aims to preserve the shape of the cells or tissue involved as much as possible. Sometimes heat fixation is used to kill, adhere, and alter the specimen so it accepts stains. Most chemical fixatives (chemicals causing fixation) generate chemical bonds between proteins and other substances within the sample, increasing their rigidity. Common fixatives include formaldehyde, ethanol, methanol, and/or picric acid. Pieces of tissue may be embedded in paraffin wax to increase their mechanical strength and stability and to make them easier to cut into thin slices.\n\nPermeabilization involves treatment of cells with (usually) a mild surfactant. This treatment dissolves cell membranes, and allows larger dye molecules into the cell's interior.\n\nMounting usually involves attaching the samples to a glass microscope slide for observation and analysis. In some cases, cells may be grown directly on a slide. For samples of loose cells (as with a blood smear or a pap smear) the sample can be directly applied to a slide. For larger pieces of tissue, thin sections (slices) are made using a microtome; these slices can then be mounted and inspected.\n\nMost of the dyes commonly used in microscopy are available as BSC-certified stains. This means that samples of the manufacturer's batch have been tested by an independent body, the Biological Stain Commission (BSC), and found to meet or exceed certain standards of purity, dye content and performance in staining techniques. These standards are published in the Commission's journal Biotechnic & Histochemistry. Many dyes are inconsistent in composition from one supplier to another. The use of BSC-certified stains eliminates a source of unexpected results. \n\nSome vendors sell stains \"certified\" by themselves rather than by the Biological Stain Commission. Such products may or may not be suitable for diagnostic and other applications. \n\nA simple staining method for bacteria that is usually successful, even when the \"positive staining\" methods detailed below fail, is to use a negative stain. This can be achieved by smearing the sample onto the slide and then applying nigrosin (a black synthetic dye) or India ink (an aqueous suspension of carbon particles). After drying, the microorganisms may be viewed in bright field microscopy as lighter inclusions well-contrasted against the dark environment surrounding them. Note: negative staining is a mild technique that may not destroy the microorganisms, and is therefore unsuitable for studying pathogens.\n\nGram staining is used to determine gram status to classify bacteria broadly. It is based on the composition of their cell wall. Gram staining uses crystal violet to stain cell walls, iodine as a mordant, and a fuchsin or safranin counterstain to mark all bacteria. Gram status is important in medicine; the presence or absence of a cell wall changes the bacterium's susceptibility to some antibiotics.\n\nGram-positive bacteria stain dark blue or violet. Their cell wall is typically rich with peptidoglycan and lacks the secondary membrane and lipopolysaccharide layer found in Gram-negative bacteria.\n\nOn most Gram-stained preparations, Gram-negative organisms appear red or pink because they are counterstained. Because of presence of higher lipid content, after alcohol-treatment, the porosity of the cell wall increases, hence the CVI complex (crystal violet – iodine) can pass through. Thus, the primary stain is not retained. Also, in contrast to most Gram-positive bacteria, Gram-negative bacteria have only a few layers of peptidoglycan and a secondary cell membrane made primarily of lipopolysaccharide.\n\nEndospore staining is used to identify the presence or absence of endospores, which make bacteria very difficult to kill. This is particularly useful for identifying endospore-forming bacterial pathogens such as \"Clostridium difficile\".\n\nZiehl-Neelsen staining is used to stain species of \"Mycobacterium tuberculosis\" that do not stain with the standard laboratory staining procedures such as Gram staining.\n\nThe stains used are the red coloured Carbol fuchsin that stains the bacteria and a counter stain such as Methylene blue\n\nHaematoxylin and eosin staining protocol is used frequently in histology to examine thin sections of tissue. Haematoxylin stains cell nuclei blue, while eosin stains cytoplasm, connective tissue and other extracellular substances pink or red. Eosin is strongly absorbed by red blood cells, colouring them bright red. In a skilfully made H & E preparation the red blood cells are almost orange, and collagen and cytoplasm (especially muscle) acquire different shades of pink. When the staining is done by a machine, the subtle differences in eosinophilia are often lost. Hematoxylin stains the cell nucleus and other acidic structures (such as RNA-rich portions of the cytoplasm and the matrix of hyaline cartilage) blue. In contrast, eosin stains the cytoplasm and collagen pink.\n\nPapanicolaou staining, or Pap staining, is a frequently used method for examining cell samples from various bodily secretions. It is frequently used to stain Pap smear specimens. It uses a combination of haematoxylin, Orange G, eosin Y, Light Green SF yellowish, and sometimes Bismarck Brown Y.\n\nPeriodic acid-Schiff staining is used to mark carbohydrates (glycogen, glycoprotein, proteoglycans). It is used to distinguish different types of glycogen storage diseases.\n\nMasson's trichrome is (as the name implies) a three-colour staining protocol. The recipe has evolved from Masson's original technique for different specific applications, but all are well-suited to distinguish cells from surrounding connective tissue. Most recipes produce red keratin and muscle fibers, blue or green staining of collagen and bone, light red or pink staining of cytoplasm, and black cell nuclei.\n\nThe Romanowsky stains are all based on a combination of eosinate (chemically reduced eosin) and methylene blue (sometimes with its oxidation products azure A and azure B). Common variants include Wright's stain, Jenner's stain, May-Grunwald stain, Leishman stain and Giemsa stain.\n\nAll are used to examine blood or bone marrow samples. They are preferred over H&E for inspection of blood cells because different types of leukocytes (white blood cells) can be readily distinguished. All are also suited to examination of blood to detect blood-borne parasites such as malaria.\n\nSilver staining is the use of silver to stain histologic sections. This kind of staining is important especially to show proteins (for example type III collagen) and DNA. It is used to show both substances inside and outside cells. Silver staining is also used in temperature gradient gel electrophoresis.\n\nSome cells are \"argentaffin\". These reduce silver solution to metallic silver after formalin fixation. This method was discovered by Italian Camillo Golgi, by using a reaction between silver nitrate and potassium dichromate, thus precipitating silver chromate in some cells (see Golgi's method). Other cells are \"argyrophilic\". These reduce silver solution to metallic silver after being exposed to the stain that contains a reductant, for example hydroquinone or formalin.\n\nSudan staining is the use of Sudan dyes to stain sudanophilic substances, usually lipids. Sudan III, Sudan IV, Oil Red O, Osmium tetroxide, and Sudan Black B are often used. Sudan staining is often used to determine the level of fecal fat to diagnose steatorrhea.\n\nSpecial technique designed for staining true endospores with the use of malachite green dye, once stained, they do not decolourize.\n\nDifferent stains react or concentrate in different parts of a cell or tissue, and these properties are used to advantage to reveal specific parts or areas. Some of the most common biological stains are listed below. Unless otherwise marked, all of these dyes may be used with fixed cells and tissues; vital dyes (suitable for use with living organisms) are noted.\n\nAcridine orange (AO) is a nucleic acid selective fluorescent cationic dye useful for cell cycle determination. It is cell-permeable, and interacts with DNA and RNA by intercalation or electrostatic attractions. When bound to DNA, it is very similar spectrally to fluorescein. Like fluorescein, it is also useful as a non-specific stain for backlighting conventionally stained cells on the surface of a solid sample of tissue (fluorescence backlighted staining).\n\nBismarck brown (also Bismarck brown Y or Manchester brown) imparts a yellow colour to acid mucins.\n\nCarmine is an intensely red dye used to stain glycogen, while Carmine alum is a nuclear stain. Carmine stains require the use of a mordant, usually aluminum.\n\nCoomassie blue (also brilliant blue) nonspecifically stains proteins a strong blue colour. It is often used in gel electrophoresis.\n\nCresyl violet stains the acidic components of the neuronal cytoplasm a violet colour, specifically nissl bodies. Often used in brain research.\n\nCrystal violet, when combined with a suitable mordant, stains cell walls purple. Crystal violet is the stain used in Gram staining.\n\nDAPI is a fluorescent nuclear stain, excited by ultraviolet light and showing strong blue fluorescence when bound to DNA. DAPI binds with A=T rich repeats of chromosomes. DAPI is also not visible with regular transmission microscopy. It may be used in living or fixed cells. DAPI-stained cells are especially appropriate for cell counting.\n\nEosin is most often used as a counterstain to haematoxylin, imparting a pink or red colour to cytoplasmic material, cell membranes, and some extracellular structures. It also imparts a strong red colour to red blood cells. Eosin may also be used as a counterstain in some variants of Gram staining, and in many other protocols. There are actually two very closely related compounds commonly referred to as eosin. Most often used is eosin Y (also known as eosin Y ws or eosin yellowish); it has a very slightly yellowish cast. The other eosin compound is eosin B (eosin bluish or imperial red); it has a very faint bluish cast. The two dyes are interchangeable, and the use of one or the other is more a matter of preference and tradition.\n\nEthidium bromide intercalates and stains DNA, providing a fluorescent red-orange stain. Although it will not stain healthy cells, it can be used to identify cells that are in the final stages of apoptosis – such cells have much more permeable membranes. Consequently, ethidium bromide is often used as a marker for apoptosis in cells populations and to locate bands of DNA in gel electrophoresis. The stain may also be used in conjunction with acridine orange (AO) in viable cell counting. This EB/AO combined stain causes live cells to fluoresce green whilst apoptotic cells retain the distinctive red-orange fluorescence.\n\nAcid fuchsine may be used to stain collagen, smooth muscle, or mitochondria.\nAcid fuchsine is used as the nuclear and cytoplasmic stain in Mallory's trichrome method. Acid fuchsine stains cytoplasm in some variants of Masson's trichrome. In Van Gieson's picro-fuchsine, acid fuchsine imparts its red colour to collagen fibres. Acid fuchsine is also a traditional stain for mitochondria (Altmann's method).\n\nHaematoxylin (hematoxylin in North America) is a nuclear stain. Used with a mordant, haematoxylin stains nuclei blue-violet or brown. It is most often used with eosin in H&E (haematoxylin and eosin) staining—one of the most common procedures in histology.\n\nHoechst is a \"bis\"-benzimidazole derivative compound that binds to the \"minor groove\" of DNA. Often used in fluorescence microscopy for DNA staining, Hoechst stains appear yellow when dissolved in aqueous solutions and emit blue light under UV excitation. There are two major types of Hoechst: \"Hoechst 33258\" and \"Hoechst 33342\". The two compounds are functionally similar, but with a little difference in structure. Hoechst 33258 contains a terminal hydroxyl group and is thus more soluble in aqueous solution, however this characteristics reduces its ability to penetrate the plasma membrane. Hoechst 33342 contains an ethyl substitution on the terminal hydroxyl group (i.e. an ethylether group) making it more hydrophobic for easier plasma membrane passage\n\nIodine is used in chemistry as an indicator for starch. When starch is mixed with iodine in solution, an intensely dark blue colour develops, representing a starch/iodine complex. Starch is a substance common to most plant cells and so a weak iodine solution will stain starch present in the cells. Iodine is one component in the staining technique known as Gram staining, used in microbiology.\nLugol's solution or Lugol's iodine (IKI) is a brown solution that turns black in the presence of starches and can be used as a cell stain, making the cell nuclei more visible. Iodine is also used as a mordant in Gram's staining, it enhances dye to enter through the pore present in the cell wall/membrane.\n\nMalachite green (also known as diamond green B or victoria green B) can be used as a blue-green counterstain to safranin in the Gimenez staining technique for bacteria. It can also be used to directly stain spores.\n\nMethyl green is used commonly with bright-field, as well as fluorescence microscopes to dye the chromatin of cells so that they are more easily viewed.\n\nMethylene blue is used to stain animal cells, such as human cheek cells, to make their nuclei more observable. Also used to stain the blood film and used in cytology.\n\nNeutral red (or toluylene red) stains Nissl substance red. It is usually used as a counterstain in combination with other dyes.\n\nNile blue (or Nile blue A) stains nuclei blue. It may be used with living cells.\n\nNile red (also known as Nile blue oxazone) is formed by boiling Nile blue with sulfuric acid. This produces a mix of Nile red and Nile blue. Nile red is a lipophilic stain; it will accumulate in lipid globules inside cells, staining them red. Nile red can be used with living cells. It fluoresces strongly when partitioned into lipids, but practically not at all in aqueous solution.\n\nOsmium tetraoxide is used in optical microscopy to stain lipids. It dissolves in fats, and is reduced by organic materials to elemental osmium, an easily visible black substance.\n\nRhodamine is a protein specific fluorescent stain commonly used in fluorescence microscopy.\n\nSafranine (or Safranine O) is a red cationic dye. It binds to nuclei (DNA) and other tissue polyanions, including glycosaminoglycans in cartilage and mast cells, and components of lignin and plastids in plant tissues. Safranine should not be confused with saffron, an expensive natural dye that is used in some methods to impart a yellow colour to collagen, to contrast with blue and red colours imparted by other dyes to nuclei and cytoplasm in animal (including human) tissues.\n\nThe incorrect spelling \"safranin\" is in common use. The -ine ending is appropriate \nfor safranine O because this dye is an amine,\n\nTissues which take up stains are called chromatic. Chromosomes were so named because of their ability to absorb a violet stain.\n\nPositive affinity for a specific stain may be designated by the suffix \"-philic\". For example, tissues that stain with an azure stain may be referred to as azurophilic. This may also be used for more generalized staining properties, such as acidophilic for tissues that stain by acidic stains (most notably eosin), basophilic when staining in basic dyes, and \"amphophilic\" when staining with either acid or basic dyes. In contrast, chromophobic tissues do not take up coloured dye readily.\n\nAs in light microscopy, stains can be used to enhance contrast in transmission electron microscopy. Electron-dense compounds of heavy metals are typically used.\n\nPhosphotungstic acid is a common negative stain for viruses, nerves, polysaccharides, and other biological tissue materials.\n\nOsmium tetroxide is used in optical microscopy to stain lipids. It dissolves in fats, and is reduced by organic materials to elemental osmium, an easily visible black substance. Because it is a heavy metal that absorbs electrons, it is perhaps the most common stain used for morphology in biological electron microscopy. It is also used for the staining of various polymers for the study of their morphology by TEM. is very volatile and extremely toxic. It is a strong oxidizing agent as the osmium has an oxidation number of +8. It aggressively oxidizes many materials, leaving behind a deposit of non-volatile osmium in a lower oxidation state.\n\nRuthenium tetroxide is equally volatile and even more aggressive than osmium tetraoxide and able to stain even materials that resist the osmium stain, e.g. polyethylene.\n\nOther chemicals used in electron microscopy staining include:\nammonium molybdate, cadmium iodide, carbohydrazide, ferric chloride, hexamine, indium trichloride, lanthanum nitrate, lead acetate, lead citrate, lead(II) nitrate, periodic acid, phosphomolybdic acid, potassium ferricyanide, potassium ferrocyanide, ruthenium red, silver nitrate, silver proteinate, sodium chloroaurate, thallium nitrate, thiosemicarbazide, uranyl acetate, uranyl nitrate, and vanadyl sulfate.\n\n\n\n", "id": "411782", "title": "Staining"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52506202", "text": "Sulphide Indole Motility medium\n\nSulphide Indole Motility (SIM) medium is a bacterial growth medium which tests for the ability to reduce sulfates, the ability to produce indoles, and motility. This combination of challenges in one mixture is convenient and commercially available in stab tubes. Inoculated needles are then punctured into the culture and incubated, if the culture becomes cloudy the bacteria were able to infiltrate the media and survive. This method is particularly useful for pathogenic bacteria which are dangerous to handle on wet mount slides\n", "id": "52506202", "title": "Sulphide Indole Motility medium"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52399962", "text": "Stercomata\n\nStercomata are pellets of waste material accumulated in some species of foraminifera and testate amoebae. The pellets consist largely of clay minerals and are believed to be derived from ingested sediment, indicating that the stercomata-bearing foraminifera are filter-feeders, although it is possible that they may capture suspended particles. In certain species the stercomata are enveloped in sheet-like formations of protoplasm.\n\n", "id": "52399962", "title": "Stercomata"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52841665", "text": "Thermophyte\n\nThermophyte (Greek \"thérmos\" = warmth, heat + \"phyton\" = plant) is a plant which is tolerant or thriving at high temprtatures. These plants are categorized according to ecological valences at high temperatures, including biological extremely. Such plants included the hot-spring taxa also.\nThe most famous presdstavnici these ecological groups of plants are:\n\n", "id": "52841665", "title": "Thermophyte"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8145410", "text": "Charles Darwin\n\nCharles Robert Darwin, (; 12 February 1809 – 19 April 1882) was an English naturalist, geologist and biologist, best known for his contributions to the science of evolution. He established that all species of life have descended over time from common ancestors and, in a joint publication with Alfred Russel Wallace, introduced his scientific theory that this branching pattern of evolution resulted from a process that he called natural selection, in which the struggle for existence has a similar effect to the artificial selection involved in selective breeding.\n\nDarwin published his theory of evolution with compelling evidence in his 1859 book \"On the Origin of Species\", overcoming scientific rejection of earlier concepts of transmutation of species. By the 1870s, the scientific community and much of the general public had accepted evolution as a fact. However, many favoured competing explanations and it was not until the emergence of the modern evolutionary synthesis from the 1930s to the 1950s that a broad consensus developed in which natural selection was the basic mechanism of evolution. Darwin's scientific discovery is the unifying theory of the life sciences, explaining the diversity of life.\n\nDarwin's early interest in nature led him to neglect his medical education at the University of Edinburgh; instead, he helped to investigate marine invertebrates. Studies at the University of Cambridge (Christ's College) encouraged his passion for natural science. His five-year voyage on established him as an eminent geologist whose observations and theories supported Charles Lyell's uniformitarian ideas, and publication of his journal of the voyage made him famous as a popular author.\n\nPuzzled by the geographical distribution of wildlife and fossils he collected on the voyage, Darwin began detailed investigations, and in 1838 conceived his theory of natural selection. Although he discussed his ideas with several naturalists, he needed time for extensive research and his geological work had priority. He was writing up his theory in 1858 when Alfred Russel Wallace sent him an essay that described the same idea, prompting immediate joint publication of both of their theories. Darwin's work established evolutionary descent with modification as the dominant scientific explanation of diversification in nature. In 1871 he examined human evolution and sexual selection in \"The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex\", followed by \"The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals\" (1872). His research on plants was published in a series of books, and in his final book, \"The Formation of Vegetable Mould, through the Actions of Worms\" (1881), he examined earthworms and their effect on soil.\n\nDarwin has been described as one of the most influential figures in human history, and he was honoured by burial in Westminster Abbey.\n\nCharles Robert Darwin was born in Shrewsbury, Shropshire, on 12 February 1809, at his family's home, The Mount. He was the fifth of six children of wealthy society doctor and financier Robert Darwin and Susannah Darwin (\"née\" Wedgwood). He was the grandson of two prominent abolitionists: Erasmus Darwin on his father's side, and Josiah Wedgwood on his mother's side.\nBoth families were largely Unitarian, though the Wedgwoods were adopting Anglicanism. Robert Darwin, himself quietly a freethinker, had baby Charles baptised in November 1809 in the Anglican St Chad's Church, Shrewsbury, but Charles and his siblings attended the Unitarian chapel with their mother. The eight-year-old Charles already had a taste for natural history and collecting when he joined the day school run by its preacher in 1817. That July, his mother died. From September 1818, he joined his older brother Erasmus attending the nearby Anglican Shrewsbury School as a boarder.\n\nDarwin spent the summer of 1825 as an apprentice doctor, helping his father treat the poor of Shropshire, before going to the University of Edinburgh Medical School (at the time the best medical school in the UK) with his brother Erasmus in October 1825. Darwin found lectures dull and surgery distressing, so he neglected his studies. He learned taxidermy in around 40 daily hour-long sessions from John Edmonstone, a freed black slave who had accompanied Charles Waterton in the South American rainforest.\n\nIn Darwin's second year at the university he joined the Plinian Society, a student natural-history group featuring lively debates in which radical democratic students with materialistic views challenged orthodox religious concepts of science. He assisted Robert Edmond Grant's investigations of the anatomy and life cycle of marine invertebrates in the Firth of Forth, and on 27 March 1827 presented at the Plinian his own discovery that black spores found in oyster shells were the eggs of a skate leech. One day, Grant praised Lamarck's evolutionary ideas. Darwin was astonished by Grant's audacity, but had recently read similar ideas in his grandfather Erasmus' journals. Darwin was rather bored by Robert Jameson's natural-history course, which covered geology – including the debate between Neptunism and Plutonism. He learned the classification of plants, and assisted with work on the collections of the University Museum, one of the largest museums in Europe at the time.\n\nDarwin's neglect of medical studies annoyed his father, who shrewdly sent him to Christ's College, Cambridge, to study for a Bachelor of Arts degree as the first step towards becoming an Anglican country parson. As Darwin was unqualified for the \"Tripos\", he joined the \"ordinary\" degree course in January 1828. He preferred riding and shooting to studying. His cousin William Darwin Fox introduced him to the popular craze for beetle collecting; Darwin pursued this zealously, getting some of his finds published in James Francis Stephens' \"Illustrations of British entomology\". He became a close friend and follower of botany professor John Stevens Henslow and met other leading parson-naturalists who saw scientific work as religious natural theology, becoming known to these dons as \"the man who walks with Henslow\". When his own exams drew near, Darwin focused on his studies and was delighted by the language and logic of William Paley's \"Evidences of Christianity\" (1794). In his final examination in January 1831 Darwin did well, coming tenth out of 178 candidates for the \"ordinary\" degree.\n\nDarwin had to stay at Cambridge until June 1831. He studied Paley's \"Natural Theology or Evidences of the Existence and Attributes of the Deity\" (first published in 1802), which made an argument for divine design in nature, explaining adaptation as God acting through laws of nature. He read John Herschel's new book, \"Preliminary Discourse on the Study of Natural Philosophy\" (1831), which described the highest aim of natural philosophy as understanding such laws through inductive reasoning based on observation, and Alexander von Humboldt's \"Personal Narrative\" of scientific travels in 1799–1804. Inspired with \"a burning zeal\" to contribute, Darwin planned to visit Tenerife with some classmates after graduation to study natural history in the tropics. In preparation, he joined Adam Sedgwick's geology course, then travelled with him in the summer for a fortnight, in order to map strata in Wales.\n\nAfter a week with student friends at Barmouth, Darwin returned home on 29 August to find a letter from Henslow proposing him as a suitable (if unfinished) naturalist for a self-funded supernumerary place on with captain Robert FitzRoy, emphasising that this was a position for a gentleman rather than \"a mere collector\". The ship was to leave in four weeks on an expedition to chart the coastline of South America. Robert Darwin objected to his son's planned two-year voyage, regarding it as a waste of time, but was persuaded by his brother-in-law, Josiah Wedgwood II, to agree to (and fund) his son's participation. Darwin took care to remain in a private capacity to retain control over his collection, intending it for a major scientific institution.\n\nAfter delays, the voyage began on 27 December 1831; it lasted almost five years. As FitzRoy had intended, Darwin spent most of that time on land investigating geology and making natural history collections, while HMS \"Beagle\" surveyed and charted coasts. He kept careful notes of his observations and theoretical speculations, and at intervals during the voyage his specimens were sent to Cambridge together with letters including a copy of his journal for his family. He had some expertise in geology, beetle collecting and dissecting marine invertebrates, but in all other areas was a novice and ably collected specimens for expert appraisal. Despite suffering badly from seasickness, Darwin wrote copious notes while on board the ship. Most of his zoology notes are about marine invertebrates, starting with plankton collected in a calm spell.\n\nOn their first stop ashore at St Jago in Cape Verde, Darwin found that a white band high in the volcanic rock cliffs included seashells. FitzRoy had given him the first volume of Charles Lyell's \"Principles of Geology\", which set out uniformitarian concepts of land slowly rising or falling over immense periods, and Darwin saw things Lyell's way, theorising and thinking of writing a book on geology.\nWhen they reached Brazil, Darwin was delighted by the tropical forest, but detested the sight of slavery, and disputed this issue with Fitzroy.\n\nThe survey continued to the south in Patagonia. They stopped at Bahía Blanca, and in cliffs near Punta Alta Darwin made a major find of fossil bones of huge extinct mammals beside modern seashells, indicating recent extinction with no signs of change in climate or catastrophe. He identified the little-known \"Megatherium\" by a tooth and its association with bony armour, which had at first seemed to him to be like a giant version of the armour on local armadillos. The finds brought great interest when they reached England.\n\nOn rides with gauchos into the interior to explore geology and collect more fossils, Darwin gained social, political and anthropological insights into both native and colonial people at a time of revolution, and learnt that two types of rhea had separate but overlapping territories. Further south, he saw stepped plains of shingle and seashells as raised beaches showing a series of elevations. He read Lyell's second volume and accepted its view of \"centres of creation\" of species, but his discoveries and theorising challenged Lyell's ideas of smooth continuity and of extinction of species.\nThree Fuegians on board had been seized during the first \"Beagle\" voyage, then during a year in England were educated as missionaries. Darwin found them friendly and civilised, yet at Tierra del Fuego he met \"miserable, degraded savages\", as different as wild from domesticated animals. He remained convinced that, despite this diversity, all humans were interrelated with a shared origin and potential for improvement towards civilisation. Unlike his scientist friends, he now thought there was no unbridgeable gap between humans and animals. A year on, the mission had been abandoned. The Fuegian they had named Jemmy Button lived like the other natives, had a wife, and had no wish to return to England.\n\nDarwin experienced an earthquake in Chile and saw signs that the land had just been raised, including mussel-beds stranded above high tide. High in the Andes he saw seashells, and several fossil trees that had grown on a sand beach. He theorised that as the land rose, oceanic islands sank, and coral reefs round them grew to form atolls.\n\nOn the geologically new Galápagos Islands, Darwin looked for evidence attaching wildlife to an older \"centre of creation\", and found mockingbirds allied to those in Chile but differing from island to island. He heard that slight variations in the shape of tortoise shells showed which island they came from, but failed to collect them, even after eating tortoises taken on board as food. In Australia, the marsupial rat-kangaroo and the platypus seemed so unusual that Darwin thought it was almost as though two distinct Creators had been at work. He found the Aborigines \"good-humoured & pleasant\", and noted their depletion by European settlement.\n\nFitzRoy investigated how the atolls of the Cocos (Keeling) Islands had formed, and the survey supported Darwin's theorising. FitzRoy began writing the official \"Narrative\" of the \"Beagle\" voyages, and after reading Darwin's diary he proposed incorporating it into the account. Darwin's \"Journal\" was eventually rewritten as a separate third volume, on natural history.\n\nIn Cape Town, Darwin and FitzRoy met John Herschel, who had recently written to Lyell praising his uniformitarianism as opening bold speculation on \"that mystery of mysteries, the replacement of extinct species by others\" as \"a natural in contradistinction to a miraculous process\".\nWhen organising his notes as the ship sailed home, Darwin wrote that, if his growing suspicions about the mockingbirds, the tortoises and the Falkland Islands fox were correct, \"such facts undermine the stability of Species\", then cautiously added \"would\" before \"undermine\". He later wrote that such facts \"seemed to me to throw some light on the origin of species\".\n\nWhen the ship reached Falmouth, Cornwall, on 2 October 1836, Darwin was already a celebrity in scientific circles as in December 1835 Henslow had fostered his former pupil's reputation by giving selected naturalists a pamphlet of Darwin's geological letters. Darwin visited his home in Shrewsbury and saw relatives, then hurried to Cambridge to see Henslow, who advised him on finding naturalists available to catalogue the collections and agreed to take on the botanical specimens. Darwin's father organised investments, enabling his son to be a self-funded gentleman scientist, and an excited Darwin went round the London institutions being fêted and seeking experts to describe the collections. Zoologists had a huge backlog of work, and there was a danger of specimens just being left in storage.\n\nCharles Lyell eagerly met Darwin for the first time on 29 October and soon introduced him to the up-and-coming anatomist Richard Owen, who had the facilities of the Royal College of Surgeons to work on the fossil bones collected by Darwin. Owen's surprising results included other gigantic extinct ground sloths as well as the \"Megatherium\", a near complete skeleton of the unknown \"Scelidotherium\" and a hippopotamus-sized rodent-like skull named \"Toxodon\" resembling a giant capybara. The armour fragments were actually from \"Glyptodon\", a huge armadillo-like creature as Darwin had initially thought. These extinct creatures were related to living species in South America.\n\nIn mid-December, Darwin took lodgings in Cambridge to organise work on his collections and rewrite his \"Journal\". He wrote his first paper, showing that the South American landmass was slowly rising, and with Lyell's enthusiastic backing read it to the Geological Society of London on 4 January 1837. On the same day, he presented his mammal and bird specimens to the Zoological Society. The ornithologist John Gould soon announced that the Galapagos birds that Darwin had thought a mixture of blackbirds, \"gros-beaks\" and finches, were, in fact, twelve separate species of finches. On 17 February, Darwin was elected to the Council of the Geological Society, and Lyell's presidential address presented Owen's findings on Darwin's fossils, stressing geographical continuity of species as supporting his uniformitarian ideas.\n\nEarly in March, Darwin moved to London to be near this work, joining Lyell's social circle of scientists and experts such as Charles Babbage, who described God as a programmer of laws. Darwin stayed with his freethinking brother Erasmus, part of this Whig circle and a close friend of the writer Harriet Martineau, who promoted Malthusianism underlying the controversial Whig Poor Law reforms to stop welfare from causing overpopulation and more poverty. As a Unitarian, she welcomed the radical implications of transmutation of species, promoted by Grant and younger surgeons influenced by Geoffroy. Transmutation was anathema to Anglicans defending social order, but reputable scientists openly discussed the subject and there was wide interest in John Herschel's letter praising Lyell's approach as a way to find a natural cause of the origin of new species.\n\nGould met Darwin and told him that the Galápagos mockingbirds from different islands were separate species, not just varieties, and what Darwin had thought was a \"wren\" was also in the finch group. Darwin had not labelled the finches by island, but from the notes of others on the ship, including FitzRoy, he allocated species to islands. The two rheas were also distinct species, and on 14 March Darwin announced how their distribution changed going southwards.\nBy mid-March, Darwin was speculating in his \"Red Notebook\" on the possibility that \"one species does change into another\" to explain the geographical distribution of living species such as the rheas, and extinct ones such as the strange \"Macrauchenia\", which resembled a giant guanaco. His thoughts on lifespan, asexual reproduction and sexual reproduction developed in his \"B\" notebook around mid-July on to variation in offspring \"to adapt & alter the race to \"changing\" world\" explaining the Galápagos tortoises, mockingbirds and rheas. He sketched branching descent, then a genealogical branching of a single evolutionary tree, in which \"It is absurd to talk of one animal being higher than another\", discarding Lamarck's independent lineages progressing to higher forms.\n\nWhile developing this intensive study of transmutation, Darwin became mired in more work. Still rewriting his \"Journal\", he took on editing and publishing the expert reports on his collections, and with Henslow's help obtained a Treasury grant of £1,000 to sponsor this multi-volume \"Zoology of the Voyage of H.M.S. Beagle\", a sum equivalent to about £ in 2016. He stretched the funding to include his planned books on geology, and agreed to unrealistic dates with the publisher. As the Victorian era began, Darwin pressed on with writing his \"Journal\", and in August 1837 began correcting printer's proofs.\n\nDarwin's health suffered under the pressure. On 20 September he had \"an uncomfortable palpitation of the heart\", so his doctors urged him to \"knock off all work\" and live in the country for a few weeks. After visiting Shrewsbury he joined his Wedgwood relatives at Maer Hall, Staffordshire, but found them too eager for tales of his travels to give him much rest. His charming, intelligent, and cultured cousin Emma Wedgwood, nine months older than Darwin, was nursing his invalid aunt. His uncle Josiah pointed out an area of ground where cinders had disappeared under loam and suggested that this might have been the work of earthworms, inspiring \"a new & important theory\" on their role in soil formation, which Darwin presented at the Geological Society on 1 November.\n\nWilliam Whewell pushed Darwin to take on the duties of Secretary of the Geological Society. After initially declining the work, he accepted the post in March 1838. Despite the grind of writing and editing the \"Beagle\" reports, Darwin made remarkable progress on transmutation, taking every opportunity to question expert naturalists and, unconventionally, people with practical experience such as farmers and pigeon fanciers. Over time, his research drew on information from his relatives and children, the family butler, neighbours, colonists and former shipmates. He included mankind in his speculations from the outset, and on seeing an orangutan in the zoo on 28 March 1838 noted its childlike behaviour.\nThe strain took a toll, and by June he was being laid up for days on end with stomach problems, headaches and heart symptoms. For the rest of his life, he was repeatedly incapacitated with episodes of stomach pains, vomiting, severe boils, palpitations, trembling and other symptoms, particularly during times of stress, such as attending meetings or making social visits. The cause of Darwin's illness remained unknown, and attempts at treatment had little success.\n\nOn 23 June, he took a break and went \"geologising\" in Scotland. He visited Glen Roy in glorious weather to see the parallel \"roads\" cut into the hillsides at three heights. He later published his view that these were marine raised beaches, but then had to accept that they were shorelines of a proglacial lake.\n\nFully recuperated, he returned to Shrewsbury in July. Used to jotting down daily notes on animal breeding, he scrawled rambling thoughts about career and prospects on two scraps of paper, one with columns headed \"\"Marry\"\" and \"\"Not Marry\"\". Advantages included \"constant companion and a friend in old age ... better than a dog anyhow\", against points such as \"less money for books\" and \"terrible loss of time.\" Having decided in favour, he discussed it with his father, then went to visit Emma on 29 July. He did not get around to proposing, but against his father's advice he mentioned his ideas on transmutation.\n\nContinuing his research in London, Darwin's wide reading now included the sixth edition of Malthus's \"An Essay on the Principle of Population\", and on 28 September 1838 he noted its assertion that human \"population, when unchecked, goes on doubling itself every twenty five years, or increases in a geometrical ratio\", a geometric progression so that population soon exceeds food supply in what is known as a Malthusian catastrophe. Darwin was well prepared to compare this to de Candolle's \"warring of the species\" of plants and the struggle for existence among wildlife, explaining how numbers of a species kept roughly stable. As species always breed beyond available resources, favourable variations would make organisms better at surviving and passing the variations on to their offspring, while unfavourable variations would be lost. He wrote that the \"final cause of all this wedging, must be to sort out proper structure, & adapt it to changes\", so that \"One may say there is a force like a hundred thousand wedges trying force into every kind of adapted structure into the gaps of in the economy of nature, or rather forming gaps by thrusting out weaker ones.\" This would result in the formation of new species. As he later wrote in his \"Autobiography\":\n\nBy mid December, Darwin saw a similarity between farmers picking the best stock in selective breeding, and a Malthusian Nature selecting from chance variants so that \"every part of newly acquired structure is fully practical and perfected\", thinking this comparison \"a beautiful part of my theory\". He later called his theory natural selection, an analogy with what he termed the artificial selection of selective breeding.\n\nOn 11 November, he returned to Maer and proposed to Emma, once more telling her his ideas. She accepted, then in exchanges of loving letters she showed how she valued his openness in sharing their differences, also expressing her strong Unitarian beliefs and concerns that his honest doubts might separate them in the afterlife. While he was house-hunting in London, bouts of illness continued and Emma wrote urging him to get some rest, almost prophetically remarking \"So don't be ill any more my dear Charley till I can be with you to nurse you.\" He found what they called \"Macaw Cottage\" (because of its gaudy interiors) in Gower Street, then moved his \"museum\" in over Christmas. On 24 January 1839, Darwin was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS).\n\nOn 29 January, Darwin and Emma Wedgwood were married at Maer in an Anglican ceremony arranged to suit the Unitarians, then immediately caught the train to London and their new home.\n\nDarwin now had the framework of his theory of natural selection \"by which to work\", as his \"prime hobby\". His research included extensive experimental selective breeding of plants and animals, finding evidence that species were not fixed and investigating many detailed ideas to refine and substantiate his theory. For fifteen years this work was in the background to his main occupation of writing on geology and publishing expert reports on the \"Beagle\" collections.\n\nWhen FitzRoy's \"Narrative\" was published in May 1839, Darwin's \"Journal and Remarks\" was such a success as the third volume that later that year it was published on its own. Early in 1842, Darwin wrote about his ideas to Charles Lyell, who noted that his ally \"denies seeing a beginning to each crop of species\".\n\nDarwin's book \"The Structure and Distribution of Coral Reefs\" on his theory of atoll formation was published in May 1842 after more than three years of work, and he then wrote his first \"pencil sketch\" of his theory of natural selection. To escape the pressures of London, the family moved to rural Down House in September. On 11 January 1844, Darwin mentioned his theorising to the botanist Joseph Dalton Hooker, writing with melodramatic humour \"it is like confessing a murder\". Hooker replied \"There may in my opinion have been a series of productions on different spots, & also a gradual change of species. I shall be delighted to hear how you think that this change may have taken place, as no presently conceived opinions satisfy me on the subject.\"\n\nBy July, Darwin had expanded his \"sketch\" into a 230-page \"Essay\", to be expanded with his research results if he died prematurely. In November, the anonymously published sensational best-seller \"Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation\" brought wide interest in transmutation. Darwin scorned its amateurish geology and zoology, but carefully reviewed his own arguments. Controversy erupted, and it continued to sell well despite contemptuous dismissal by scientists.\n\nDarwin completed his third geological book in 1846. He now renewed a fascination and expertise in marine invertebrates, dating back to his student days with Grant, by dissecting and classifying the barnacles he had collected on the voyage, enjoying observing beautiful structures and thinking about comparisons with allied structures. In 1847, Hooker read the \"Essay\" and sent notes that provided Darwin with the calm critical feedback that he needed, but would not commit himself and questioned Darwin's opposition to continuing acts of creation.\n\nIn an attempt to improve his chronic ill health, Darwin went in 1849 to Dr. James Gully's Malvern spa and was surprised to find some benefit from hydrotherapy. Then, in 1851, his treasured daughter Annie fell ill, reawakening his fears that his illness might be hereditary, and after a long series of crises she died.\n\nIn eight years of work on barnacles (Cirripedia), Darwin's theory helped him to find \"homologies\" showing that slightly changed body parts served different functions to meet new conditions, and in some genera he found minute males parasitic on hermaphrodites, showing an intermediate stage in evolution of distinct sexes. In 1853, it earned him the Royal Society's Royal Medal, and it made his reputation as a biologist. In 1854 he became a Fellow of the Linnean Society of London, gaining postal access to its library. He began a major reassessment of his theory of species, and in November realised that divergence in the character of descendants could be explained by them becoming adapted to \"diversified places in the economy of nature\".\n\nBy the start of 1856, Darwin was investigating whether eggs and seeds could survive travel across seawater to spread species across oceans. Hooker increasingly doubted the traditional view that species were fixed, but their young friend Thomas Henry Huxley was firmly against the transmutation of species. Lyell was intrigued by Darwin's speculations without realising their extent. When he read a paper by Alfred Russel Wallace, \"On the Law which has Regulated the Introduction of New Species\", he saw similarities with Darwin's thoughts and urged him to publish to establish precedence. Though Darwin saw no threat, on 14 May 1856 he began writing a short paper. Finding answers to difficult questions held him up repeatedly, and he expanded his plans to a \"big book on species\" titled \"Natural Selection\", which was to include his \"note on Man\". He continued his researches, obtaining information and specimens from naturalists worldwide including Wallace who was working in Borneo. In mid-1857 he added a section heading; \"Theory applied to Races of Man\", but did not add text on this topic. On 5 September 1857, Darwin sent the American botanist Asa Gray a detailed outline of his ideas, including an abstract of \"Natural Selection\", which omitted human origins and sexual selection. In December, Darwin received a letter from Wallace asking if the book would examine human origins. He responded that he would avoid that subject, \"so surrounded with prejudices\", while encouraging Wallace's theorising and adding that \"I go much further than you.\"\n\nDarwin's book was only partly written when, on 18 June 1858, he received a paper from Wallace describing natural selection. Shocked that he had been \"forestalled\", Darwin sent it on that day to Lyell, as requested by Wallace, and although Wallace had not asked for publication, Darwin suggested he would send it to any journal that Wallace chose. His family was in crisis with children in the village dying of scarlet fever, and he put matters in the hands of his friends. After some discussion, Lyell and Hooker decided on a joint presentation at the Linnean Society on 1 July of \"On the Tendency of Species to form Varieties; and on the Perpetuation of Varieties and Species by Natural Means of Selection\". On the evening of 28 June, Darwin's baby son died of scarlet fever after almost a week of severe illness, and he was too distraught to attend.\n\nThere was little immediate attention to this announcement of the theory; the president of the Linnean Society remarked in May 1859 that the year had not been marked by any revolutionary discoveries. Only one review rankled enough for Darwin to recall it later; Professor Samuel Haughton of Dublin claimed that \"all that was new in them was false, and what was true was old\". Darwin struggled for thirteen months to produce an abstract of his \"big book\", suffering from ill health but getting constant encouragement from his scientific friends. Lyell arranged to have it published by John Murray.\n\n\"On the Origin of Species\" proved unexpectedly popular, with the entire stock of 1,250 copies oversubscribed when it went on sale to booksellers on 22 November 1859. In the book, Darwin set out \"one long argument\" of detailed observations, inferences and consideration of anticipated objections. In making the case for common descent, he included evidence of homologies between humans and other mammals. Having outlined sexual selection, he hinted that it could explain differences between human races. He avoided explicit discussion of human origins, but implied the significance of his work with the sentence; \"Light will be thrown on the origin of man and his history.\" His theory is simply stated in the introduction:\nAt the end of the book he concluded that:\nThe last word was the only variant of \"evolved\" in the first five editions of the book. \"Evolutionism\" at that time was associated with other concepts, most commonly with embryological development, and Darwin first used the word evolution in \"The Descent of Man\" in 1871, before adding it in 1872 to the 6th edition of \"The Origin of Species\".\n\nThe book aroused international interest, with less controversy than had greeted the popular \"Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation\". Though Darwin's illness kept him away from the public debates, he eagerly scrutinised the scientific response, commenting on press cuttings, reviews, articles, satires and caricatures, and corresponded on it with colleagues worldwide. The book did not explicitly discuss human origins, but included a number of hints about the animal ancestry of humans from which the inference could be made. The first review asked, \"If a monkey has become a man–what may not a man become?\" and said it should be left to theologians as it was too dangerous for ordinary readers. Amongst early favourable responses, Huxley's reviews swiped at Richard Owen, leader of the scientific establishment Huxley was trying to overthrow. In April, Owen's review attacked Darwin's friends and condescendingly dismissed his ideas, angering Darwin, but Owen and others began to promote ideas of supernaturally guided evolution. Patrick Matthew drew attention to his 1831 book which had a brief appendix suggesting a concept of natural selection leading to new species, but he had not developed the idea.\n\nThe Church of England's response was mixed. Darwin's old Cambridge tutors Sedgwick and Henslow dismissed the ideas, but liberal clergymen interpreted natural selection as an instrument of God's design, with the cleric Charles Kingsley seeing it as \"just as noble a conception of Deity\". In 1860, the publication of \"Essays and Reviews\" by seven liberal Anglican theologians diverted clerical attention from Darwin, with its ideas including higher criticism attacked by church authorities as heresy. In it, Baden Powell argued that miracles broke God's laws, so belief in them was atheistic, and praised \"Mr Darwin's masterly volume [supporting] the grand principle of the self-evolving powers of nature\". Asa Gray discussed teleology with Darwin, who imported and distributed Gray's pamphlet on theistic evolution, \"Natural Selection is not inconsistent with natural theology\". The most famous confrontation was at the public 1860 Oxford evolution debate during a meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, where the Bishop of Oxford Samuel Wilberforce, though not opposed to transmutation of species, argued against Darwin's explanation and human descent from apes. Joseph Hooker argued strongly for Darwin, and Thomas Huxley's legendary retort, that he would rather be descended from an ape than a man who misused his gifts, came to symbolise a triumph of science over religion.\n\nEven Darwin's close friends Gray, Hooker, Huxley and Lyell still expressed various reservations but gave strong support, as did many others, particularly younger naturalists. Gray and Lyell sought reconciliation with faith, while Huxley portrayed a polarisation between religion and science. He campaigned pugnaciously against the authority of the clergy in education, aiming to overturn the dominance of clergymen and aristocratic amateurs under Owen in favour of a new generation of professional scientists. Owen's claim that brain anatomy proved humans to be a separate biological order from apes was shown to be false by Huxley in a long running dispute parodied by Kingsley as the \"Great Hippocampus Question\", and discredited Owen.\n\nDarwinism became a movement covering a wide range of evolutionary ideas. In 1863 Lyell's \"Geological Evidences of the Antiquity of Man\" popularised prehistory, though his caution on evolution disappointed Darwin. Weeks later Huxley's \"Evidence as to Man's Place in Nature\" showed that anatomically, humans are apes, then \"The Naturalist on the River Amazons\" by Henry Walter Bates provided empirical evidence of natural selection. Lobbying brought Darwin Britain's highest scientific honour, the Royal Society's Copley Medal, awarded on 3 November 1864. That day, Huxley held the first meeting of what became the influential \"X Club\" devoted to \"science, pure and free, untrammelled by religious dogmas\". By the end of the decade most scientists agreed that evolution occurred, but only a minority supported Darwin's view that the chief mechanism was natural selection.\n\nThe \"Origin of Species\" was translated into many languages, becoming a staple scientific text attracting thoughtful attention from all walks of life, including the \"working men\" who flocked to Huxley's lectures. Darwin's theory also resonated with various movements at the time and became a key fixture of popular culture. Cartoonists parodied animal ancestry in an old tradition of showing humans with animal traits, and in Britain these droll images served to popularise Darwin's theory in an unthreatening way. While ill in 1862 Darwin began growing a beard, and when he reappeared in public in 1866 caricatures of him as an ape helped to identify all forms of evolutionism with Darwinism.\n\nDespite repeated bouts of illness during the last twenty-two years of his life, Darwin's work continued. Having published \"On the Origin of Species\" as an abstract of his theory, he pressed on with experiments, research, and writing of his \"big book\". He covered human descent from earlier animals including evolution of society and of mental abilities, as well as explaining decorative beauty in wildlife and diversifying into innovative plant studies.\n\nEnquiries about insect pollination led in 1861 to novel studies of wild orchids, showing adaptation of their flowers to attract specific moths to each species and ensure cross fertilisation. In 1862 \"Fertilisation of Orchids\" gave his first detailed demonstration of the power of natural selection to explain complex ecological relationships, making testable predictions. As his health declined, he lay on his sickbed in a room filled with inventive experiments to trace the movements of climbing plants. Admiring visitors included Ernst Haeckel, a zealous proponent of \"Darwinismus\" incorporating Lamarckism and Goethe's idealism. Wallace remained supportive, though he increasingly turned to Spiritualism.\n\nDarwin's book \"The Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication\" (1868) was the first part of his planned \"big book\", and included his unsuccessful hypothesis of pangenesis attempting to explain heredity. It sold briskly at first, despite its size, and was translated into many languages. He wrote most of a second part, on natural selection, but it remained unpublished in his lifetime.\nLyell had already popularised human prehistory, and Huxley had shown that anatomically humans are apes. With \"The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex\" published in 1871, Darwin set out evidence from numerous sources that humans are animals, showing continuity of physical and mental attributes, and presented sexual selection to explain impractical animal features such as the peacock's plumage as well as human evolution of culture, differences between sexes, and physical and cultural racial characteristics, while emphasising that humans are all one species. His research using images was expanded in his 1872 book \"The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals\", one of the first books to feature printed photographs, which discussed the evolution of human psychology and its continuity with the behaviour of animals. Both books proved very popular, and Darwin was impressed by the general assent with which his views had been received, remarking that \"everybody is talking about it without being shocked.\" His conclusion was \"that man with all his noble qualities, with sympathy which feels for the most debased, with benevolence which extends not only to other men but to the humblest living creature, with his god-like intellect which has penetrated into the movements and constitution of the solar system–with all these exalted powers–Man still bears in his bodily frame the indelible stamp of his lowly origin.\"\n\nHis evolution-related experiments and investigations led to books on Orchids, \"Insectivorous Plants, The Effects of Cross and Self Fertilisation in the Vegetable Kingdom\", different forms of flowers on plants of the same species, and \"The Power of Movement in Plants\". His botanical work was interpreted and popularised by various writers including Grant Allen and H. G. Wells, and helped transform plant science in the late C19 and early C20. In his last book he returned to \"The Formation of Vegetable Mould through the Action of Worms\".\n\nIn 1882 he was diagnosed with what was called \"angina pectoris\" which then meant coronary thrombosis and disease of the heart. At the time of his death, the physicians diagnosed \"anginal attacks\", and \"heart-failure\". Today it is speculated that Darwin was suffering from chronic Chagas disease. This speculation is based on a journal entry written by Darwin, describing he was bitten by the \"Kissing Bug\" in Mendoza, Argentina in 1835; and based on the constellation of clinical symptoms he exhibited, including cardiac disease which is a hallmark of chronic Chagas disease. Exhuming Darwin's body is likely necessary to definitively determine his state of infection by detecting DNA of infecting parasite, T. cruzi, that causes Chagas disease . \n\nHe died at Down House on 19 April 1882. His last words were to his family, telling Emma \"I am not the least afraid of death – Remember what a good wife you have been to me – Tell all my children to remember how good they have been to me\", then while she rested, he repeatedly told Henrietta and Francis \"It's almost worth while to be sick to be nursed by you\". He had expected to be buried in St Mary's churchyard at Downe, but at the request of Darwin's colleagues, after public and parliamentary petitioning, William Spottiswoode (President of the Royal Society) arranged for Darwin to be honoured by burial in Westminster Abbey, close to John Herschel and Isaac Newton. The funeral was held on Wednesday 26 April and was attended by thousands of people, including family, friends, scientists, philosophers and dignitaries.\n\nBy the time of his death, Darwin had convinced most scientists that evolution as descent with modification was correct, and he was regarded as a great scientist who had revolutionised ideas. In June 1909, though few at that time agreed with his view that \"natural selection has been the main but not the exclusive means of modification\", he was honoured by more than 400 officials and scientists from across the world who met in Cambridge to commemorate his centenary and the fiftieth anniversary of \"On the Origin of Species\". Around the beginning of the 20th century, a period that has been called \"the eclipse of Darwinism\", scientists proposed various alternative evolutionary mechanisms, which eventually proved untenable. Ronald Fisher, an English statistician, finally united Mendelian genetics with natural selection, in the period between 1918 and his 1930 book \"The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection\". He gave the theory a mathematical footing and brought broad scientific consensus that natural selection was the basic mechanism of evolution, thus founding the basis for population genetics and the modern evolutionary synthesis, with J.B.S. Haldane and Sewall Wright, which set the frame of reference for modern debates and refinements of the theory.\n\nDuring Darwin's lifetime, many geographical features were given his name. An expanse of water adjoining the Beagle Channel was named \"Darwin Sound\" by Robert FitzRoy after Darwin's prompt action, along with two or three of the men, saved them from being marooned on a nearby shore when a collapsing glacier caused a large wave that would have swept away their boats, and the nearby Mount Darwin in the Andes was named in celebration of Darwin's 25th birthday. When the \"Beagle\" was surveying Australia in 1839, Darwin's friend John Lort Stokes sighted a natural harbour which the ship's captain Wickham named \"Port Darwin\": a nearby settlement was renamed Darwin in 1911, and it became the capital city of Australia's Northern Territory.\n\nMore than 120 species and nine genera have been named after Darwin. In one example, the group of tanagers related to those Darwin found in the Galápagos Islands became popularly known as \"Darwin's finches\" in 1947, fostering inaccurate legends about their significance to his work.\n\nDarwin's work has continued to be celebrated by numerous publications and events. The Linnean Society of London has commemorated Darwin's achievements by the award of the Darwin–Wallace Medal since 1908. Darwin Day has become an annual celebration, and in 2009 worldwide events were arranged for the bicentenary of Darwin's birth and the 150th anniversary of the publication of \"On the Origin of Species\".\n\nDarwin has been commemorated in the UK, with his portrait printed on the reverse of £10 banknotes printed along with a hummingbird and HMS \"Beagle\", issued by the Bank of England.\n\nA life-size seated statue of Darwin can be seen in the main hall of the Natural History Museum in London.\nA seated statue of Darwin, unveiled 1897, stands in front of Shrewsbury Library, the building that used to house Shrewsbury School, which Darwin attended as a boy. Another statue of Darwin as a young man is situated in the grounds of Christ's College, Cambridge.\n\nDarwin College, a postgraduate college at Cambridge University, is named after the Darwin family.\n\nThe Darwins had ten children: two died in infancy, and Annie's death at the age of ten had a devastating effect on her parents. Charles was a devoted father and uncommonly attentive to his children. Whenever they fell ill, he feared that they might have inherited weaknesses from inbreeding due to the close family ties he shared with his wife and cousin, Emma Wedgwood. He examined this topic in his writings, contrasting it with the advantages of crossing amongst many organisms. Despite his fears, most of the surviving children and many of their descendants went on to have distinguished careers (see Darwin-Wedgwood family).\n\nOf his surviving children, George, Francis and Horace became Fellows of the Royal Society, distinguished as astronomer, botanist and civil engineer, respectively. All three were knighted. Another son, Leonard, went on to be a soldier, politician, economist, eugenicist and mentor of the statistician and evolutionary biologist Ronald Fisher.\n\nDarwin's family tradition was nonconformist Unitarianism, while his father and grandfather were freethinkers, and his baptism and boarding school were Church of England. When going to Cambridge to become an Anglican clergyman, he did not doubt the literal truth of the Bible. He learned John Herschel's science which, like William Paley's natural theology, sought explanations in laws of nature rather than miracles and saw adaptation of species as evidence of design. On board HMS \"Beagle\", Darwin was quite orthodox and would quote the Bible as an authority on morality. He looked for \"centres of creation\" to explain distribution, and related the antlion found near kangaroos to distinct \"periods of Creation\".\n\nBy his return, he was critical of the Bible as history, and wondered why all religions should not be equally valid. In the next few years, while intensively speculating on geology and the transmutation of species, he gave much thought to religion and openly discussed this with his wife Emma, whose beliefs also came from intensive study and questioning. The theodicy of Paley and Thomas Malthus vindicated evils such as starvation as a result of a benevolent creator's laws, which had an overall good effect. To Darwin, natural selection produced the good of adaptation but removed the need for design, and he could not see the work of an omnipotent deity in all the pain and suffering, such as the ichneumon wasp paralysing caterpillars as live food for its eggs. He still viewed organisms as perfectly adapted, and \"On the Origin of Species\" reflects theological views. Though he thought of religion as a tribal survival strategy, Darwin was reluctant to give up the idea of God as an ultimate lawgiver. He was increasingly troubled by the problem of evil.\n\nDarwin remained close friends with the vicar of Downe, John Brodie Innes, and continued to play a leading part in the parish work of the church, but from around 1849 would go for a walk on Sundays while his family attended church. He considered it \"absurd to doubt that a man might be an ardent theist and an evolutionist\" and, though reticent about his religious views, in 1879 he wrote that \"I have never been an atheist in the sense of denying the existence of a God. – I think that generally ... an agnostic would be the most correct description of my state of mind\".\n\nThe \"Lady Hope Story\", published in 1915, claimed that Darwin had reverted to Christianity on his sickbed. The claims were repudiated by Darwin's children and have been dismissed as false by historians.\n\nDarwin's views on social and political issues reflected his time and social position. He grew up in a family of Whig reformers who, like his uncle Josiah Wedgwood, supported electoral reform and the emancipation of slaves. Darwin was passionately opposed to slavery, while seeing no problem with the working conditions of English factory workers or servants. His taxidermy lessons in 1826 from the freed slave John Edmonstone, who he long recalled as \"a very pleasant and intelligent man\", reinforced his belief that black people shared the same feelings, and could be as intelligent as people of other races. He took the same attitude to native people he met on the \"Beagle\" voyage. These attitudes were not unusual in Britain in the 1820s, much as it shocked visiting Americans. British society became more racist in mid century, but Darwin remained strongly against slavery, against \"ranking the so-called races of man as distinct species\", and against ill-treatment of native people. He valued European civilisation and saw colonisation as spreading its benefits, with the sad but inevitable effect that savage peoples who did not become civilised faced extinction. Darwin's theories presented this as natural, and were cited to promote policies that went against his humanitarian principles.\n\nHe thought men's eminence over women was the outcome of sexual selection, a view disputed by Antoinette Brown Blackwell in \"The Sexes Throughout Nature\".\n\nDarwin was intrigued by his half-cousin Francis Galton's argument, introduced in 1865, that statistical analysis of heredity showed that moral and mental human traits could be inherited, and principles of animal breeding could apply to humans. In \"The Descent of Man\", Darwin noted that aiding the weak to survive and have families could lose the benefits of natural selection, but cautioned that withholding such aid would endanger the instinct of sympathy, \"the noblest part of our nature\", and factors such as education could be more important. When Galton suggested that publishing research could encourage intermarriage within a \"caste\" of \"those who are naturally gifted\", Darwin foresaw practical difficulties, and thought it \"the sole feasible, yet I fear utopian, plan of procedure in improving the human race\", preferring to simply publicise the importance of inheritance and leave decisions to individuals. Francis Galton named this field of study \"eugenics\" in 1883.\n\nDarwin's fame and popularity led to his name being associated with ideas and movements that, at times, had only an indirect relation to his writings, and sometimes went directly against his express comments.\n\nThomas Malthus had argued that population growth beyond resources was ordained by God to get humans to work productively and show restraint in getting families, this was used in the 1830s to justify workhouses and laissez-faire economics. Evolution was by then seen as having social implications, and Herbert Spencer's 1851 book \"Social Statics\" based ideas of human freedom and individual liberties on his Lamarckian evolutionary theory.\n\nSoon after the \"Origin\" was published in 1859, critics derided his description of a struggle for existence as a Malthusian justification for the English industrial capitalism of the time. The term \"Darwinism\" was used for the evolutionary ideas of others, including Spencer's \"survival of the fittest\" as free-market progress, and Ernst Haeckel's polygenistic ideas of human development. Writers used natural selection to argue for various, often contradictory, ideologies such as laissez-faire dog-eat dog capitalism, colonialism and imperialism. However, Darwin's holistic view of nature included \"dependence of one being on another\"; thus pacifists, socialists, liberal social reformers and anarchists such as Peter Kropotkin stressed the value of co-operation over struggle within a species. Darwin himself insisted that social policy should not simply be guided by concepts of struggle and selection in nature.\n\nAfter the 1880s, a eugenics movement developed on ideas of biological inheritance, and for scientific justification of their ideas appealed to some concepts of Darwinism. In Britain, most shared Darwin's cautious views on voluntary improvement and sought to encourage those with good traits in \"positive eugenics\". During the \"Eclipse of Darwinism\", a scientific foundation for eugenics was provided by Mendelian genetics. Negative eugenics to remove the \"feebleminded\" were popular in America, Canada and Australia, and eugenics in the United States introduced compulsory sterilization laws, followed by several other countries. Subsequently, Nazi eugenics brought the field into disrepute.\n\nThe term \"Social Darwinism\" was used infrequently from around the 1890s, but became popular as a derogatory term in the 1940s when used by Richard Hofstadter to attack the laissez-faire conservatism of those like William Graham Sumner who opposed reform and socialism. Since then, it has been used as a term of abuse by those opposed to what they think are the moral consequences of evolution.\n\nDarwin was a prolific writer. Even without publication of his works on evolution, he would have had a considerable reputation as the author of \"The Voyage of the Beagle\", as a geologist who had published extensively on South America and had solved the puzzle of the formation of coral atolls, and as a biologist who had published the definitive work on barnacles. While \"On the Origin of Species\" dominates perceptions of his work, \"The Descent of Man\" and \"The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals\" had considerable impact, and his books on plants including \"The Power of Movement in Plants\" were innovative studies of great importance, as was his final work on \"The Formation of Vegetable Mould through the Action of Worms\".\n\n. Darwin was eminent as a naturalist, geologist, biologist, and author. After working as a physician's assistant and two years as a medical student, he was educated as a clergyman; he was also trained in taxidermy.\n\n. Robert FitzRoy was to become known after the voyage for biblical literalism, but at this time he had considerable interest in Lyell's ideas, and they met before the voyage when Lyell asked for observations to be made in South America. FitzRoy's diary during the ascent of the River Santa Cruz in Patagonia recorded his opinion that the plains were raised beaches, but on return, newly married to a very religious lady, he recanted these ideas.\n\n. In the section \"Morphology\" of Chapter XIII of \"On the Origin of Species\", Darwin commented on homologous bone patterns between humans and other mammals, writing: \"What can be more curious than that the hand of a man, formed for grasping, that of a mole for digging, the leg of the horse, the paddle of the porpoise, and the wing of the bat, should all be constructed on the same pattern, and should include the same bones, in the same relative positions?\" and in the concluding chapter: \"The framework of bones being the same in the hand of a man, wing of a bat, fin of the porpoise, and leg of the horse … at once explain themselves on the theory of descent with slow and slight successive modifications.\"\nIn \"On the Origin of Species\" Darwin mentioned human origins in his concluding remark that \"In the distant future I see open fields for far more important researches. Psychology will be based on a new foundation, that of the necessary acquirement of each mental power and capacity by gradation. Light will be thrown on the origin of man and his history.\"\n\nIn \"Chapter VI: Difficulties on Theory\" he referred to sexual selection: \"I might have adduced for this same purpose the differences between the races of man, which are so strongly marked; I may add that some little light can apparently be thrown on the origin of these differences, chiefly through sexual selection of a particular kind, but without here entering on copious details my reasoning would appear frivolous.\"\n\nIn \"The Descent of Man\" of 1871, Darwin discussed the first passage:\n\"During many years I collected notes on the origin or descent of man, without any intention of publishing on the subject, but rather with the determination not to publish, as I thought that I should thus only add to the prejudices against my views. It seemed to me sufficient to indicate, in the first edition of my 'Origin of Species,' that by this work 'light would be thrown on the origin of man and his history;' and this implies that man must be included with other organic beings in any general conclusion respecting his manner of appearance on this earth.\" In a preface to the 1874 second edition, he added a reference to the second point: \"it has been said by several critics, that when I found that many details of structure in man could not be explained through natural selection, I invented sexual selection; I gave, however, a tolerably clear sketch of this principle in the first edition of the 'Origin of Species,' and I there stated that it was applicable to man.\"\n\n. See, for example, WILLA volume 4, \"Charlotte Perkins Gilman and the Feminization of Education\" by Deborah M. De Simone: \"Gilman shared many basic educational ideas with the generation of thinkers who matured during the period of \"intellectual chaos\" caused by Darwin's Origin of the Species. Marked by the belief that individuals can direct human and social evolution, many progressives came to view education as the panacea for advancing social progress and for solving such problems as urbanisation, poverty, or immigration.\"\n\n. See, for example, the song \"A lady fair of lineage high\" from Gilbert and Sullivan's \"Princess Ida\", which describes the descent of man (but not woman!) from apes.\n\n. Darwin's belief that black people had the same essential humanity as Europeans, and had many mental similarities, was reinforced by the lessons he had from John Edmonstone in 1826. Early in the \"Beagle\" voyage, Darwin nearly lost his position on the ship when he criticised FitzRoy's defence and praise of slavery. He wrote home about \"how steadily the general feeling, as shown at elections, has been rising against Slavery. What a proud thing for England if she is the first European nation which utterly abolishes it! I was told before leaving England that after living in slave countries all my opinions would be altered; the only alteration I am aware of is forming a much higher estimate of the negro character.\" Regarding Fuegians, he \"could not have believed how wide was the difference between savage and civilized man: it is greater than between a wild and domesticated animal, inasmuch as in man there is a greater power of improvement\", but he knew and liked civilised Fuegians like Jemmy Button: \"It seems yet wonderful to me, when I think over all his many good qualities, that he should have been of the same race, and doubtless partaken of the same character, with the miserable, degraded savages whom we first met here.\"\n\nIn the \"Descent of Man\", he mentioned the similarity of Fuegians' and Edmonstone's minds to Europeans' when arguing against \"ranking the so-called races of man as distinct species\".\n\nHe rejected the ill-treatment of native people, and for example wrote of massacres of Patagonian men, women, and children, \"Every one here is fully convinced that this is the most just war, because it is against barbarians. Who would believe in this age that such atrocities could be committed in a Christian civilized country?\"\n\n. Geneticists studied human heredity as Mendelian inheritance, while eugenics movements sought to manage society, with a focus on social class in the United Kingdom, and on disability and ethnicity in the United States, leading to geneticists seeing this as impractical pseudoscience. A shift from voluntary arrangements to \"negative\" eugenics included compulsory sterilisation laws in the United States, copied by Nazi Germany as the basis for Nazi eugenics based on virulent racism and \"racial hygiene\".()\n", "id": "8145410", "title": "Charles Darwin"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59238", "text": "Entomology\n\nEntomology () is the scientific study of insects, a branch of zoology. In the past the term \"insect\" was more vague, and historically the definition of entomology included the study of terrestrial animals in other arthropod groups or other phyla, such as arachnids, myriapods, earthworms, land snails, and slugs. This wider meaning may still be encountered in informal use.\n\nLike several of the other fields that are categorized within zoology, entomology is a taxon-based category; any form of scientific study in which there is a focus on insect-related inquiries is, by definition, entomology. Entomology therefore overlaps with a cross-section of topics as diverse as molecular genetics, behavior, biomechanics, biochemistry, systematics, physiology, developmental biology, ecology, morphology, and paleontology.\n\nAt some 1.3 million described species, insects account for more than two-thirds of all known organisms, date back some 400 million years, and have many kinds of interactions with humans and other forms of life on earth.\n\nEntomology is rooted in nearly all human cultures from prehistoric times, primarily in the context of agriculture (especially biological control and beekeeping), but scientific study began only as recently as the 16th century.\n\nWilliam Kirby is widely considered as the father of Entomology. In collaboration with William Spence, he published a definitive entomological encyclopedia, \"Introduction to Entomology\", regarded as the subject's foundational text. He also helped to found the Royal Entomological Society in London in 1833, one of the earliest such societies in the world; earlier antecedents, such as the Aurelian society date back to the 1740s.\n\nEntomology developed rapidly in the 19th and 20th centuries, and was studied by large numbers of people, including such notable figures as Charles Darwin, Jean-Henri Fabre, Vladimir Nabokov, Karl von Frisch (winner of the 1973 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine), and two-time Pulitzer Prize winner E. O. Wilson.\n\nThere has also been a history of people becoming entomologists through museum curation and research assistance, such as Sophie Lutterlough at the Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History. Insect identification is an increasingly common hobby, with butterflies and dragonflies being the most popular.\nMost insects can easily be recognized to order such as Hymenoptera (bees, wasps, and ants) or Coleoptera (beetles). However, insects other than Lepidoptera (butterflies and moths) are typically identifiable to genus or species only through the use of Identification keys and Monographs. Because the class Insecta contains a very large number of species (over 330,000 species of beetles alone) and the characteristics separating them are unfamiliar, and often subtle (or invisible without a microscope), this is often very difficult even for a specialist. This has led to the development of automated species identification systems targeted on insects, for example, Daisy, ABIS, SPIDA and Draw-wing.\n\nIn 1994 the Entomological Society of America launched a new professional certification program for the pest control industry called The Associate Certified Entomologist (ACE). To qualify as a \"true entomologist\" an individual would normally require an advanced degree, with most entomologists pursuing their PhD. While not true entomologists in the traditional sense, individuals who attain the ACE certification may be referred to as ACEs, Amateur Entomologists, or Associate Entomologists.\n\nMany entomologists specialize in a single order or even a family of insects, and a number of these subspecialties are given their own informal names, typically (but not always) derived from the scientific name of the group:\n\nLike other scientific specialties, entomologists have a number of local, national, and international organizations. There are also many organizations specializing in specific subareas.\n\nHere is a list of selected museums which contain very large insect collections.\n\nZoological survey of India \n\n\n\n\n\nEntomology has been depicted in various films such as:\n\n\n\n", "id": "59238", "title": "Entomology"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53316821", "text": "Proximal Centriole-Like\n\nThe proximal centriole-like or PCL is an atypical type of centriole found in the sperm cells of insects. The PCL name is due to some similarity to the Proximal centriole found in Vertebrates sperm and the hypothesis that the two structures are homologous. The PCL is an atypical type of centriole because it does not have microtubules, a defining feature of centrioles. However, the PCL is a type of centriole for several reasons. (1) the PCL formation is dependent upon the same genetic pathway that mediates the initiation of centriole formation. (2) The PCL is composed of centriolar proteins. (3) After fertilization, the sperm PCL function like a centriole. The PCL recruits pericentriolar material (PCM) forming a centrosome that acts as a microtubule-organizing center (MTOC). The PCL also serves as a platform to form a typical centriole in the zygote, as expected from a centriole. Also, the PCL is essential to form one of the two spindle poles of the dividing zygote \n\nThe PCL was discovered in flies. However, it is also found in beetles, suggesting it is a common form of atypical centriole in insects.\n", "id": "53316821", "title": "Proximal Centriole-Like"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53354629", "text": "CRISPR-Display\n\nCRISPR-Display (CRISP-Disp) is a modification of the CRISPR/Cas9 (Clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats) system for genome editing. The CRISPR/Cas9 system uses a short guide RNA (sgRNA) sequence to direct a \"Streptococcus pyogenes\" Cas9 nuclease, acting as a programmable DNA binding protein, to cleave DNA at a site of interest.\n\nCRISPR-Display, in contrast, uses a nuclease deficient Cas9 (dCas9) and an engineered sgRNA with aptameric accessory RNA domains, ranging from 100bp to 5kb, outside of the normal complimentary targeting sequence. The accessory RNA domains can be functional domains, such as long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs), protein-binding motifs, or epitope tags for immunochemistry. This allows for investigation of the functionality of certain lncRNAs, and targeting of ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complexes to genomic loci.\n\nCRISPR-Display was first published in Nature Methods in July 2015, and developed by David M. Shechner, Ezgi Hacisuleyman, Scott T. Younger and John Rinn at Harvard University and Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), USA.\n\nThe CRISPR/Cas9 system is based on an adaptive immune system of prokaryotic organisms, and its use for genome editing was first proposed and developed in collaboration between Jennifer Doudna (University of California, Berkeley) and Emmanuelle Charpentier (Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, Germany). The method, and its application in editing human cells, was published in Science on August 17, 2012. In January 2013, the Feng Zhang lab at the Broad Institute at MIT published another method in Science, having further optimized the sgRNA structure and expression for use in mammalian cells. By the beginning of 2014, almost 2500 studies mentioning CRISPR in their title has been published.\n\nNon-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) are RNA transcripts that are not translated into a protein product, but instead exert their function as RNA molecules. They are involved in a range of processes, like post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression, genomic imprinting, and regulating the chromatin state, and thereby the expression, of a given locus. Many ncRNAs have been discovered, but in many cases, their function has yet to be accurately dissected due to technical challenges. ncRNA function is often not affected by introducing point mutations and premature stop codons. ncRNAs are also thought to regulate gene expression, so deletion studies have a hard time distinguishing effects of ncRNA loss from effects of gene misregulation due to the deletion. Studies of ncRNAs have also lacked the throughput necessary for discerning the RNA based functionality. To meet these challenges, the Rinn lab therefore developed a synthetic biology approach, using CRISPR/Cas9 system, with the Cas9 acting as a conduit, to target ncRNA modules to ectopic genomic locations, and investigating the ncRNAs effects on reporter genes and other genomic features at that site.\n\nCRISPR-Disp modifies the CRISPR/Cas9 technology by using a catalytically inactive, i.e. nuclease deficient, Cas9 mutant (dCas9), and altering the RNA used for targeting Cas9 to a genomic location.\n\nSince sgRNAs are usually expressed by RNA polymerase III, which limits the length of the RNA domain that can be inserted, CRISPR-Display incorporates RNA polymerase II to permit expression of longer transcripts (~80-250 nucleotides) to overcome this limitation. CRISPR-Display can therefore add larger RNA domains, like natural and lncRNA domains, without affecting dCas9 localization.\n\nThe sgRNA is engineered with an aptameric accessory RNA domain in the sequence outside of the targeting sequence. In the development of the technique, five model cofactors with different topology constructs were used: TOP1-4 and INT with an accessory domain (P4-P6 domain) at different positions, including the 5’ and 3’ end and internally within the sgRNA. Each domain contained a stem-loop that can be recognized by a PP7 bacteriophage coat protein. The complex was delivered into mammalian cells (HEK293FT cells) by a lentiviral vector.\n\nTo ensure that the attached RNA module both retains targeting functionality as well as the resulting complex drive transcriptional activation at a specific site of interest, transient reporter gene expression of luciferase and fluorescent protein was measured. Two variations of such a transcription activator assay was performed; directly with a dCas9 fused to a transcriptional activator/repressor (VP64, a factor known to enhance gene expression) (Direct activation) or indirectly where the transcriptional activator is fused to an RNA binding protein module on the sgRNA (Bridged activation). Reporter gene activation through direct activation imply the sgRNA variant binds and targets dCas9 efficiently. All the five topologies showed direct activation except TOP3 and TOP4, which showed reduced activity. Bridged activation indicates that the fused RNA accessory domain is intact in mature dCas9 complexes. Bridged activation was observed with TOP1, TOP3 and INT. The results were recapitulated at endogenous loci by targeting minimal sgRNA and selective expanded topologies (TOP1 and INT) to human ASCL1, IL1RN, NTF3 and TTN promoters. Direct and bridged activation were observed by qRT-PCR for each construct proving that CRISP-Disp allows deployment of large RNA domains to genomic loci.\n\nThe effect of internal (stem-loop) insertion size on dCas9 complex was assessed using INT-like constructs with cassettes of PP7 stem loops with a size range from 25 nt to 247 nt. Each construct induced significant activation in the reporter assays signifying that internal insertion size does not influence the dCas9 complex function. Similarly, the effect of internal insert sequence was also determined through a set of unique sgRNA variants displaying cassettes of 25 random nucleotides. Reporter assays and RIP-Seq confirmed that sequence does not govern complex efficacy.\n\nThe utility of CRISP-Disp was explored with an array of functional RNA domains such as natural protein binding motifs, artificial aptamers and small molecules with varying size. While all the complexes were functional and viable, and successfully deployed the RNA domains at endogenous loci, the efficacy changed with length and expression levels. This suggests that optimization of structure and sequence might be important required before designing the construct.\n\nTo determine if artificial lncRNA scaffolds can be used with CRISPR-Display, dCas9 complexes were assembled with artificial RNA with a size comparable to lncRNAs. The constructs were expanded to ~650nt size with an additional P4-P6 domain with hairpin loops that can be recognized by another phage coat protein, MS2. These topology constructs were called double TOP0-2 with the two domains either together at 5’ or 3’end or separately at each end. Transient reporter assays followed by confirmation with RNA Immunoprecipitation sequencing (RIP-qPCR) showed that all the three constructs retained both the domains in the complex.\n\nThis was also tested with natural lncRNA domains by building Pol II-driven TOP1 and INT constructs fused with human lncRNA domains. lncRNAs used had lengths between ~90-4800 nt, and included the NoRC-binding pRNA, three enhancer-transcribed RNAs (eRNAs) FALEC, TRERNA1 and ncRNA-a3), \"Xist\" A-repeat (RepA), and the 4,799-nt transcriptional activator \"HOTTIP\". While all the constructs showed significant direct activation, it decreased with increasing lncRNA-sgRNA length. These lncRNA domains could regulate the reporters independent of dCas9 with pRNA and RepA repressing the GLuc reporter expression (repressors) and TRERNA1, ncRNA-a3 and HOTTIP inducing activation (activators), but were properly targeted to an ectopic location of interest by using the CRISP-Disp system.\n\nThus, CRISP-Disp enables control of gene expression with deployment of both artificial scaffolds as well as natural lncRNA domains.\n\nCRISPR-Display allows for previously unavailable studies of lncRNA functionality, artificial ncRNA functionalization, recruitment of endogenous and engineered proteins to genomic loci, and locus affinity tagging for cell imaging. \nCRISPR-Display allows targeted localization of natural lncRNAs to ectopic sites for investigation of their function. Exposing various ectopic DNA loci to natural lncRNAs can help show the effects of lncRNAs on gene expression and chromatin state, and help dissect the mechanism of such effects. One of the major outstanding questions in the study of lncRNAs is whether effects on chromatin state or gene expression adjacent to a lncRNA locus is due to functional, sequence-specific mechanisms of the lncRNA itself, or due simply to the act of transcribing the lncRNA. Localizing lncRNA to ectopic sites with CRISPR-Display can help separate the function of the RNA itself from the effects of transcribing such RNA species. Before CRISPR-Display, such studies were challenging due to low throughput, and inability to distinguish lncRNA function from other confounding factors like cryptically encoded peptides or functional DNA elements.\n\nCRISPR-Display also allows for targeted use of the wide array of artificial RNAs with specific functionality, such as RNAs for recruitment of endogenous RNA-binding proteins, antibody affinity tagging, and recruitment of tagged fusion proteins.\n\nOne example of artificial ncRNA functionalization is incorporating RNA domains recognized by specific antibodies to the sgRNA. CRISPR-Display can target the sgRNA with a particular epitope sequence to various loci, and fluorescently tagged antibodies can be used to image the locus, showing its localization in the nucleus, and possible interactions with other tagged proteins or genomic loci.\n\nEndogenous proteins known to bind a specific RNA motif can be recruited to ectopic genomic locations by incorporating the RNA motif into the sgRNA. CRISPR-Display can also recruit fusion proteins engineered to bind specific RNA sequences. Recruiting these proteins can allow studies of specific proteins’ and protein complexes’ effects on gene regulation and chromatin states, as well as specific regulation of certain genes for investigation of gene function.\n\nDue to the modularity of the sgRNA, several different sgRNAs with distinct functional modules can be expressed in each cell at once. The different RNA modules can then work simultaneously and independently, allowing for, for example, regulation of one genomic location whilst imaging the effects of the regulation at another location.\n\nThe possible applications of CRISPR-Display will continue to increase with further development and understanding of ncRNA functionalization. It is not unreasonable to think that CRISPR-Display may one day enable complex synthetic biology systems, with distinct temporal expression of sgRNAs, and networks and circuits of gene regulation by targeting of regulatory proteins.\n\n\n", "id": "53354629", "title": "CRISPR-Display"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=749788", "text": "Deformity\n\nA deformity, dysmorphism, or dysmorphic feature is a major abnormality in the shape of a body part or organ compared to the normal shape of that part.\nDeformity may arise from numerous causes:\n\nDeformity can occur in non-humans, as well. Frogs can be mutated due to Ribeiroia (Trematoda) infection.\n\nIn many cases in which a major deformity is present at birth, it is the result of an underlying condition severe enough that the baby does not survive very long. The mortality of severely deformed births may be due to a range of complications including missing or non-functioning vital organs, structural defects that prevent breathing or eating, and high susceptibility to injuries, abnormal facial appearance, or infections that lead to death.\n\nMythological creatures may have been created due to a deformative syndrome also, for instance, descriptions of mermaids may be related to the symptoms of sirenomelia. The Irish Mythology includes the Fomorians, who are almost without exception described as being deformed, possessing only one of what most have two of (eyes, arms, legs, etc.) or having larger than normal limbs.\n\n\n", "id": "749788", "title": "Deformity"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53363521", "text": "Third-generation sequencing\n\nThird-generation sequencing (also known as long-read sequencing) is a class of DNA sequencing methods currently under active development. Third generation sequencing works by reading the nucleotide sequences at the single molecule level, in contrast to existing methods that require breaking long strands of DNA into small segments then inferring nucleotide sequences by amplification and synthesis. Critical challenges exist in the engineering of the necessary molecular instruments for whole genome sequencing to make the technology commercially available.\n\nSecond-generation sequencing, often referred to as Next-generation sequencing (NGS), has dominated the DNA sequencing space since its development. It has dramatically reduced the cost of DNA sequencing by enabling a massively-paralleled approach capable of producing large numbers of reads at exceptionally high coverages throughout the genome.\n\nSince eukaryotic genomes contain many repetitive regions, a major limitation to this class of sequencing methods is the length of reads it produces. Briefly, second generation sequencing works by first amplifying the DNA molecule and then conducting sequencing by synthesis. The collective fluorescent signal resulting from synthesizing a large number of amplified identical DNA strands allows the inference of nucleotide identity. However, due to random errors, DNA synthesis between the amplified DNA strands would become progressively out-of-sync. Quickly, the signal quality deteriorates as the read-length grows. In order to preserve read quality, long DNA molecules must be broken up into small segments, resulting in a critical limitation of second generation sequencing technologies. Computational efforts aimed to overcome this challenge often rely on approximative heuristics that may not result in accurate assemblies.\n\nBy enabling direct sequencing of single DNA molecules, third generation sequencing technologies have the capability to produce substantially longer reads than second generation sequencing. Such advantage has critical implications for both genome science and the study of biology in general. However, due to various technical challenges, third generation sequencing has error rates at almost unrepairable levels, rendering the technologies impractical for certain applications such as de novo genome assembly. These technologies are undergoing active development and therefore it is expected that there will be further improvements to the high error rates. For applications that are more tolerant to error rates such as metagenomics or larger structural variant calling, third generation sequencing has been found to outperform existing methods.\n\nSequencing technologies with a different approach than second-generation platforms were first described as \"third-generation\" in 2008-2009.\n\nThere are two companies currently at the heart of third generation sequencing technology development: Pacific Biosciences and Oxford Nanopore Technology. These companies are taking fundamentally different approaches to sequencing single DNA molecules.\n\nPacBio developed the sequencing platform of single molecule real time sequencing (SMRT), based on the properties of zero-mode waveguides. Signals are in the form of light signals.\n\nOxford Nanopore’s technology involves passing a DNA molecule through a pore structure and then measuring changes in electrical field surrounding the pore.\n\nIn comparison to the current generation of sequencing technologies, third generation sequencing has the obvious advantage of producing much longer reads. It is expected that these longer read lengths will alleviate numerous computational challenges surrounding genome assembly, transcript reconstruction, and metagenomics among other important areas of modern biology and medicine.\n\nIt is well known that eukaryotic genomes including primates and humans are complex and have large numbers of long repeated regions. Short reads from second generation sequencing must resort to approximative strategies in order to infer sequences over long ranges for assembly and genetic variant calling. Pair end reads have been leveraged by second generation sequencing to combat these limitations. However, exact fragment lengths of pair ends are often unknown and must also be approximated as well. By making long reads lengths possible, third generation sequencing technologies have clear advantages.\n\nEpigenetic markers are stable and potentially heritable modifications to the DNA molecule that are not in its sequence. An example is DNA methylation at CpG sites, which has been found to influence gene expression. Histone modifications are another example. The current generation of sequencing technologies rely on laboratory techniques such as ChIP-sequencing for the detection of epigenetic markers. These techniques involve tagging the DNA strand, breaking and filtering fragments that contain markers, followed by sequencing. Third generation sequencing may enable direct detection of these markers due to their distinctive signal from the other four nucleotide bases.\n\nOther important advantages of third generation sequencing technologies include portability and sequencing speed. Since minimal sample preprocessing is required in comparison to second generation sequencing, smaller equipments could be designed. Oxford Nanopore Technology has recently commercialized the MinION sequencer. This sequencing machine is roughly the size of a regular USB flash drive and can be used readily by connecting to a laptop. In addition, since the sequencing process is not parallelized across regions of the genome, data could be collected and analyzed in real time. These advantages of third generation sequencing may be well-suited in hospital settings where quick and on-site data collection and analysis is demanded.\n\nThird generation sequencing, as it currently stands, faces important challenges mainly surrounding accurate identification of nucleotide bases; error rates are still much higher compared to second generation sequencing. This is generally due to instability of the molecular machinery involved. For example, in PacBio’s single molecular and real time sequencing technology, the DNA polymerase molecule becomes increasingly damaged as the sequencing process occurs. Additionally, since the process happens quickly, the signals given off by individual bases may be blurred by signals from neighbouring bases. This poses a new computational challenge for deciphering the signals and consequently inferring the sequence. Methods such as Hidden Markov Models, for example, have been leveraged for this purpose with some success.\n\nOn average, different individuals of the human population share about 99.9% of their genes. In other words, approximately only one out of every thousand bases would differ between any two person. The high error rates involved with third generation sequencing are inevitably problematic for the purpose of characterizing individual differences that exist between members of the same species.\n\nGenome assembly is the reconstruction of whole genome DNA sequences. This is generally done with two fundamentally different approaches.\n\nWhen a reference genome is available, as one is in the case of human, newly sequenced reads could simply be aligned to the reference genome in order to characterize its properties. Such reference based assembly is quick and easy but has the disadvantage of “hiding\" novel sequences and large copy number variants. In addition, reference genomes do not yet exist for most organisms.\n\n\"De novo\" assembly is the alternative genome assembly approach to reference alignment. It refers to the reconstruction of whole genome sequences entirely from raw sequence reads. This method would be chosen when there is no reference genome, when the species of the given organism is unknown as in metagenomics, or when there exist genetic variants of interest that may not be detected by reference genome alignment.\n\nGiven the short reads produced by the current generation of sequencing technologies, de novo assembly is a major computational problem. It is normally approached by an iterative process of finding and connecting sequence reads with sensible overlaps. Various computational and statistical techniques, such as de bruijn graphs and overlap layout consensus graphs, have been leveraged to solve this problem. Nonetheless, due to the highly repetitive nature of eukaryotic genomes, accurate and complete reconstruction of genome sequences in de novo assembly remains challenging. Pair end reads have been posed as a possible solution, though exact fragment lengths are often unknown and must be approximated.\nLong read lengths offered by third generation sequencing may alleviate many of the challenges currently faced by de novo genome assemblies. For example, if an entire repetitive region can be sequenced unambiguously in a single read, no computation inference would be required. Computational methods have been proposed to alleviate the issue of high error rates. For example, in one study, it was demonstrated that de novo assembly of a microbial genome using PacBio sequencing alone performed superior to that of second generation sequencing.\n\nThird generation sequencing may also be used in conjunction with second generation sequencing. This approach is often referred to as hybrid sequencing. For example, long reads from third generation sequencing may be used to resolve ambiguities that exist in genomes previously assembled using second generation sequencing. On the other hand, short second generation reads have been used to correct errors in that exist in the long third generation reads. In general, this hybrid approach has been shown to improve de novo genome assemblies significantly.\n\nDNA methylation (DNAm) – the covalent modification of DNA at CpG sites resulting in attached methyl groups – is the best understood component of epigenetic machinery. DNA modifications and resulting gene expression can vary across cell types, temporal development, with genetic ancestry, can change due to environmental stimuli and are heritable. After the discovery of DNAm, researchers have also found its correlation to diseases like cancer and autism. In this disease etiology context DNAm is an important avenue of further research.\n\nThe current most common methods for examining methylation state require an assay that fragments DNA before standard second generation sequencing on the Illumina platform. As a result of short read length, information regarding the longer patterns of methylation are lost. Third generation sequencing technologies offer the capability for single molecule real-time sequencing of longer reads, and detection of DNA modification without the aforementioned assay.\n\nOxford Nanopore Technologies’ MinION has been used to detect DNAm. As each DNA strand passes through a pore, it produces electrical signals which have been found to be sensitive to epigenetic changes in the nucleotides, and a hidden Markov model (HMM) was used to analyze MinION data to detect 5-methylcytosine (5mC) DNA modification. The model was trained using synthetically methylated \"E. coli\" DNA and the resulting signals measured by the nanopore technology. Then the trained model was used to detect 5mC in MinION genomic reads from a human cell line which already had a reference methylome. The classifier has 82% accuracy in randomly sampled singleton sites, which increases to 95% when more stringent thresholds are applied.\n\nOther methods address different types of DNA modifications using the MinION platform. Stoiber et al. examined 4-methylcytosine (4mC) and 6-methyladenine (6mA), along with 5mC, and also created a software to directly visualize the raw MinION data in human-friendly way. Here they found that in \"E. coli\", which has a known methylome, event windows of 5 base pairs long can be used to divide and statistically analyze the raw MinION electrical signals. A straightforward Mann-Whitney U test can detect modified portions of the \"E. coli\" sequence, as well as further split the modifications into 4mC, 6mA or 5mC regions.\n\nIt seems likely that in the future, MinION raw data will be used to detect many different epigenetic marks in DNA.\n\nPacBio sequencing has also been used to detect DNA methylation. In this platform the pulse width - the width of a fluorescent light pulse - corresponds to a specific base. In 2010 it was shown that the interpulse distance in control and methylated samples are different, and there is a \"signature\" pulse width for each methylation type. In 2012 using the PacBio platform the binding sites of DNA methyltransferases were characterized. The detection of N6-methylation in C Elegans was shown in 2015. DNA methylation on \"N\"-adenine using the PacBio platform in mouse embryonic stem cells was shown in 2016.\n\nOther forms of DNA modifications – from heavy metals, oxidation, or UV damage – are also possible avenues of research using Oxford Nanopore and PacBio third generation sequencing.\n\nProcessing of the raw data – such as normalization to the median signal – was needed on MinION raw data, reducing real-time capability of the technology. Consistency of the electrical signals is still an issue, making it difficult to accurately call a nucleotide. MinION has low throughput; since multiple overlapping reads are hard to obtain, this further leads to accuracy problems of downstream DNA modification detection. Both the hidden Markov model and statistical methods used with MinION raw data require repeated observations of DNA modifications for detection, meaning that individual modified nucleotides need to be consistently present in multiple copies of the genome, e.g. in multiple cells or plasmids in the sample.\n\nFor the PacBio platform, too, depending on what methylation you expect to find, coverage needs can vary. As of March 2017, other epigenetic factors like histone modifications have not been discoverable using third-generation technologies. Longer patterns of methylation are often lost because smaller contigs still need to be assembled.\n\nTranscriptomics is the study of the transcriptome, usually by characterizing the relative abundances of messenger RNA molecules the tissue under study. According to the central dogma of molecular biology, genetic information flows from double stranded DNA molecules to single stranded mRNA molecules where they can be readily translated into function protein molecules. By studying the transcriptome, one can gain valuable insight into the regulation of gene expressions.\n\nWhile expression levels as the gene level can be more or less accurately depicted by second generation sequencing, transcript level information is still an important challenge. As a consequence, the role of alternative splicing in molecular biology remains largely elusive. Third generation sequencing technologies hold promising prospects in resolving this issue by enabling sequencing of mRNA molecules at their full lengths.\n\nAlternative splicing (AS) is the process by which a single gene may give rise to multiple distinct mRNA transcripts and consequently different protein translations. Some evidence suggests that AS is a ubiquitous phenomenon and may play a key role in determining the phenotypes of organisms, especially in complex eukaryotes; all eukaryotes contain genes consisting of introns that may undergo AS. In particular, it has been estimated that AS occurs in 95% of all human multi-exon genes. AS has undeniable potential to influence myriad biological processes. Advancing knowledge in this area has critical implications for the study of biology in general.\n\nThe current generation of sequencing technologies produce only short reads, putting tremendous limitation on the ability to detect distinct transcripts; short reads must be reverse engineered into original transcripts that could have given rise to the resulting read observations. This task is further complicated by the highly variable expression levels across transcripts, and consequently variable read coverages across the sequence of the gene. In addition, exons may be shared among individual transcripts, rendering unambiguous inferences essentially impossible. Existing computational methods make inferences based on the accumulation of short reads at various sequence locations often by making simplifying assumptions. Cufflinks takes a parsimonious approach, seeking to explain all the reads with the fewest possible number of transcripts. On the other hand, StringTie attempts to simultaneously estimate transcript abundances while assembling the reads. These methods, while reasonable, may not always identify real transcripts.\n\nA study published in 2008 surveyed 25 different existing transcript reconstruction protocols. Its evidence suggested that existing methods are generally weak in assembling transcripts, though the ability to detect individual exons are relatively intact. According to the estimates, average sensitivity to detect exons across the 25 protocols is 80% for Caenorhabditis elegans genes. In comparison, transcript identification sensitivity decreases to 65%. For human, the study reported an exon detection sensitivity averaging to 69% and transcript detection sensitivity had an average of mere 33%. In other words, for human, existing methods are able to identify less than half of all existing transcript.\n\nThird generation sequencing technologies have demonstrated promising prospects in solving the problem of transcript detection as well as mRNA abundance estimation at the level of transcripts. While error rates remain high, third generation sequencing technologies have the capability to produce much longer read lengths. Pacific Bioscience has introduced the iso-seq platform, proposing to sequence mRNA molecules at their full lengths. It is anticipated that Oxford Nanopore will put forth similar technologies. The trouble with higher error rates may be alleviated by supplementary high quality short reads. This approach has been previously tested and reported to reduce the error rate by more than 3 folds.\n\nMetagenomics is the analysis of genetic material recovered directly from environmental samples.\n\nThe main advantage for third-generation sequencing technologies in metagenomics is their speed of sequencing in comparison to second generation techniques. Speed of sequencing is important for example in the clinical setting (i.e. pathogen identification), to allow for efficient diagnosis and timely clinical actions.\n\nOxford Nanopore's MinION was used in 2015 for real-time metagenomic detection of pathogens in complex, high-background clinical samples. The first Ebola virus (EBV) read was sequenced 44 seconds after data acquisition. There was uniform mapping of reads to genome; at least one read mapped to >88% of the genome. The relatively long reads allowed for sequencing of a near-complete viral genome to high accuracy (97–99% identity) directly from a primary clinical sample.\n\nA common phylogenetic marker for microbial community diversity studies is the 16S ribosomal RNA gene. Both MinION and PacBio's SMRT platform have been used to sequence this gene. In this context the PacBio error rate was comparable to that of shorter reads from 454 and Illumina's MiSeq sequencing platforms.\n\nMinION's high error rate (~10-40%) prevented identification of antimicrobial resistance markers, for which single nucleotide resolution is necessary. For the same reason eukaryotic pathogens were not identified. Ease of carryover contamination when re-using same the flow cell (standard wash protocols don’t work) is also a concern. Unique barcodes may allow for more multiplexing. Furthermore, performing accurate species identification for bacteria, fungi and parasites is very difficult, as they share a larger portion of the genome, and some only differ by <5%.\n\nThe per base sequencing cost is still significantly more than that of MiSeq. However, the prospect of supplementing reference databases with full-length sequences from organisms below the limit of detection from the Sanger approach; this could possibly greatly help the identification of organisms in metagenomics.\n\nBefore third generation sequencing can be used reliably in the clinical context, there is a need for standardization of lab protocols. These protocols are not yet as optimized as PCR methods.\n", "id": "53363521", "title": "Third-generation sequencing"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52974301", "text": "Trans-Golgi network vesicle protein 23 A\n\nTrans-Golgi network vesicle protein 23 A (TVP23A) is a protein coded for the TVP23A gene, formally known as FAM18A. TVP23A is located on chromosome 16. It is known to have human paralogs, TVP23B and TVP23C, as well as orthologs in many different species, notably yeast, mice, and chickens. The general consensus on the TVP23A protein indicate that it has some function in the late Golgi apparatus and is involved in retrograde transport from endosomes back into the Golgi apparatus. The nature of this transport is still unknown.\n\nTVP23A is located at cytogenic band 16p13.13, on the negative strand of Chromosome 16.\nTVP23A stands for Trans-Golgi network Vesicle Protein 23A TVP23A, is the current name for the protein. Aliases of TVP23A include FAM18A, and rarely YDR084C.\n\nThere are two known isoforms of TVP23A, variant one and variant two, with variant one being the more common variant in humans.\n\nTVP23A is a member of the pfam superfamily containing the domain of unknown function 846 (DUF846). TVP23A has a predicted molecular weight of 24.1 kilodaltons, an isoelectric point of 6.5, and relatively high amounts of tryptophan and phenylalanine. The secondary structure of TVP23A consists primarily of alpha helices composing 4 transmembrane domains. There is not much information on the tertiary structure of TVP23A or its homologs. iTASSER was used to generate a prediction for the folding pattern of TVP23A, which supports the presence of multiple helix structures.\nTVP23A is ubiquitously expressed in all human tissues. There is evidence of higher expression in the brain tissue of mice. The promoter for TVP23A is GXP_91266, spanning 1403 base pairs located on the negative strand of chromosome 16.\n\nThe hypothesized function of TVP23A is a transmembrane protein involved in retrograde transport of vesicles from early endosomes into the late Golgi apparatus. TVP23A interactions with SNARE TVI1 were found to be required for retrograde transport.\nTVP23A has been found to interact with four different proteins via Yeast two hybrid arrays. Two of these proteins, YIPF1 and YIPF2, are believed to be Golgi transport proteins.\n\nTVP23A is a DUF846 containing protein, which is homologous throughout TVP-type proteins. This domain contains the 4 transmembrane domains of TVP23A\n\nTVP23A has two paralogs, TVP23B and TVP23C. TVP23B and TVP23C are 96% similar to each other, and both are located on chromosome 17. Due to the locations of these three genes, and their identities to each other, it is probable that ancestral TVP23 underwent duplication and translocation, giving rise to TVP23A on chromosome 16 and TVP23B/C on chromosome 17, which then underwent a second duplication to form TVP23B and TVP23C.\nTVP23A has been found in all multicellular eukaryotes, including fungi. This gene has not been found in bacteria.\n", "id": "52974301", "title": "Trans-Golgi network vesicle protein 23 A"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53970843", "text": "Machine learning in bioinformatics\n\nMachine learning, a subfield of computer science involving the development of algorithms that learn how to make predictions based on data, has a number of emerging applications in the field of bioinformatics. Bioinformatics deals with computational and mathematical approaches for understanding and processing biological data. \n\nPrior to the emergence of machine learning algorithms, bioinformatics algorithms had to be explicitly programmed by hand which, for problems such as protein structure prediction, proves extremely difficult. Machine learning techniques such as deep learning enable the algorithm to make use of automatic feature learning which means that based on the dataset alone, the algorithm can learn how to combine multiple features of the input data into a more abstract set of features from which to conduct further learning. This multi-layered approach to learning patterns in the input data allows such systems to make quite complex predictions when trained on large datasets. In recent years, the size and number of available biological datasets have skyrocketed, enabling bioinformatics researchers to make use of these machine learning systems. Machine learning has been applied to six main subfields of bioinformatics: genomics, proteomics, microarrays, systems biology, evolution, and text mining.\n\nGenomics involves the study of the genome, the complete DNA sequence, of organisms. While genomic sequence data has historically been sparse due to the technical difficulty in sequencing a piece of DNA, the number of available sequences is growing exponentially. However, while raw data is becoming increasingly available and accessible, the biological interpretation of this data is occurring at a much slower pace. Therefore, there is an increasing need for the development of machine learning systems that can automatically determine the location of protein-encoding genes within a given DNA sequence. This is a problem in computational biology known as gene prediction.\n\nGene prediction is commonly performed through a combination of what are known as extrinsic and intrinsic searches. For the extrinsic search, the input DNA sequence is run through a large database of sequences whose genes have been previously discovered and their locations annotated. A number of the sequence's genes can be identified by determining which strings of bases within the sequence are homologous to known gene sequences. However, given the limitation in size of the database of known and annotated gene sequences, not all the genes in a given input sequence can be identified through homology alone. Therefore, an intrinsic search is needed where a gene prediction program attempts to identify the remaining genes from the DNA sequence alone.\n\nMachine learning is also been used for the problem of multiple sequence alignment which involves aligning many DNA or amino acid sequences in order to determine regions of similarity that could indicate a shared evolutionary history.\nIt can also be used to detect and visualize genome rearrangements.\n\nProteins, strings of amino acids, gain much of their function from protein folding in which they conform into a three-dimensional structure. This structure is composed of a number of layers of folding, including the primary structure (i.e. the flat string of amino acids), the secondary structure (alpha helices and beta sheets), the tertiary structure, and the quartenary structure.\n\nProtein secondary structure prediction is a main focus of this subfield as the further protein foldings (tertiary and quartenary structures) are determined based on the secondary structure. Solving the true structure of a protein is an incredibly expensive and time-intensive process, furthering the need for systems that can accurately predict the structure of a protein by analyzing the amino acid sequence directly. Prior to machine learning, researchers needed to conduct this prediction manually. This trend began in 1951 when Pauling and Corey released their work on predicting the hydrogen bond configurations of a protein from a polypeptide chain. Today, through the use of automatic feature learning, the best machine learning techniques are able to achieve an accuracy of 82-84%. The current state-of-the-art in secondary structure prediction uses a system called DeepCNF (deep convolutional neural fields) which relies on the machine learning model of artificial neural networks to achieve an accuracy of approximately 84% when tasked to classify the amino acids of a protein sequence into one of three structural classes (helix, sheet, or coil). The theoretical limit for three-state protein secondary structure is 88–90%.\n\nMachine learning has also been applied to proteomics problems such as protein side-chain prediction, protein loop modeling, and protein contact map prediction.\n\nMicroarrays, a type of lab-on-a-chip, are used for automatically collecting data about large amounts of biological material. Machine learning can aid in the analysis of this data, and it has been applied to expression pattern identification, classification, and genetic network induction.\n\nThis technology is especially useful for monitoring the expression of genes within a genome, aiding in diagnosing different types of cancer based on which genes are expressed. One of the main problems in this field is identifying which genes are expressed based on the collected data. In addition, due to the huge number of genes on which data is collected by the microarray, there is a large amount of irrelevant data to the task of expressed gene identification, further complicating this problem. Machine learning presents a potential solution to this problem as various classification methods can be used to perform this identification. The most commonly used methods are radial basis function networks, deep learning, Bayesian classification, decision trees, and random forest.\n\nSystems biology focuses on the study of the emergent behaviors from complex interactions of simple biological components in a system. Such components can include molecules such as DNA, RNA, proteins, and metabolites.\n\nMachine learning has been used to aid in the modelling of these complex interactions in biological systems in domains such as genetic networks, signal transduction networks, and metabolic pathways. Probabilistic graphical models, a machine learning technique for determining the structure between different variables, are one of the most commonly used methods for modeling genetic networks. In addition, machine learning has been applied to systems biology problems such as identifying transcription factor binding sites using a technique known as Markov chain optimization. Genetic algorithms, machine learning techniques which are based on the natural process of evolution, have been used to model genetic networks and regulatory structures.\n\nOther systems biology applications of machine learning include the task of enzyme function prediction, high throughput microarray data analysis, analysis of genome-wide association studies to better understand markers of Multiple Sclerosis, protein function prediction, and identification of NCR-sensitivity of genes in yeast.\n\nThe increase in available biological publications led to the issue of the increase in difficulty in searching through and compiling all the relevant available information on a given topic across all sources. This task is known as knowledge extraction. This is necessary for biological data collection which can then in turn be fed into machine learning algorithms to generate new biological knowledge. Machine learning can be used for this knowledge extraction task using techniques such as natural language processing to extract the useful information from human-generated reports in a database. Text Nailing, an alternative approach to machine learning, capable of extracting features from clinical narrative notes was introduced in 2017.\n\nThis technique has been applied to the search for novel drug targets, as this task requires the examination of information stored in biological databases and journals. Annotations of proteins in protein databases often do not reflect the complete known set of knowledge of each protein, so additional information must be extracted from biomedical literature. Machine learning has been applied to automatic annotation of the function of genes and proteins, determination of the subcellular localization of a protein, analysis of DNA-expression arrays, large-scale protein interaction analysis, and molecule interaction analysis.\n\nOther application is the detection and visualization of regions that share high degree of similarity or are new according to a reference.\n", "id": "53970843", "title": "Machine learning in bioinformatics"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53452258", "text": "Compartmentalized ciliogenesis\n\nCompartmentalized ciliogenesis is the most common type of ciliogenesis where the cilium axoneme is formed separated from the cytoplasm by the ciliary membrane and a ciliary gate known as the transition zone.\n", "id": "53452258", "title": "Compartmentalized ciliogenesis"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2730533", "text": "Fenestra\n\nA fenestra (plural fenestrae) in anatomy, zoology and biology, is any small opening or pore. It is Latin for window and is used in various fields to describe a window or opening in a structure.\n\nIn gross anatomy in zoology fenestrae are often found in bones particularly in the skull. In anatomy the round window and oval window are also known as the \"fenestra rotunda\" and the \"fenestra ovalis\".\nIn microanatomy they are found in endothelium and fenestrated capillaries and allow for the rapid exchange of molecules between the capillaries, sinusoid blood vessels and surrounding tissue. These pores may enlarge and contract in response to various stimuli such as the hormone noradrenaline. The elastic layer of the tunica intima is a fenestrated membrane.\n\nIn surgery a fenestra is a new opening made in a part of the body to enable drainage or access.\n\nIn biology the perforations in a perforate leaf are also described as fenestrae and the leaf also called a fenestrate leaf. The leaf window is also known as a fenestra, and is a translucent structure that transmits light, as in \"Fenestraria\". \n\nIn zoology the trilobite \"Fenestraspis\" possessed extensive fenestrae in the posterior part of the body and apparently the thorax. In the paleognathae there is an ilio–ischiatic fenestra.\n\n", "id": "2730533", "title": "Fenestra"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54069375", "text": "Diploidization\n\nDiploidization is the process of converting a polyploid genome back into a diploid one. Polyploidy is a product of whole genome duplication (WGD) and is followed by diploidization as a result of genome shock (1, 2, 4, 5). The plant kingdom has undergone multiple events of polyploidization followed by diploidization in both ancient and recent lineages (1). It has also been hypothesized that vertebrate genomes have gone through two rounds of paleopolyploidy (5). The mechanisms of diploidization are poorly understood but patterns of chromosomal loss and evolution of novel genes are observed in the process.\n\nElimination of Duplicated Genes\n\nUpon the formation of new polyploids, large sections of DNA are rapidly lost from one genome (1, 2, 4). The loss of DNA effectively achieves two purposes. First, the eliminated copy restores the normal gene dosage in the diploid organism (1). Second, the changes in chromosomal genetic structure increase the divergence of the homoeologous chromosomes (similar chromosomes from inter-species hybrid) and promotes homologous chromosome pairing (2). Both are important in terms of adjusting to the induced genome shock.\n\nEvolution of Genes to Ensure Correct Chromosome Pairing\n\nThere have been rare events in which genes that ensure proper chromosome pairing have evolved shortly after polyploidization. One such gene, Ph1, exists in hexaploid wheat (6). These genes keep the two sets of genomes separately by either spatially separating them or giving them a unique chromatin identity to facilitate recognition from its homologous pair. This prevents the need of rapid gene loss to speed up homeologous chromosome diversification.\n\n1. Coordinate inter-genomic gene expression:\n\nDuplicated genes often result in increased dosage of gene products. Doubled dosages are sometimes lethal to the organism thus the two genome copies must coordinate in a structured fashion to maintain normal nuclear activity (1). Many mechanisms of diploidization promote this coordination.\n\n2. Maintain intra-genomic chromosome pairing at meiosis:\n\nChromosome pairing during meiosis is a significant challenge for polyploids. Homoeologous chromosomes with similar genetic content may pair with each other resulting in trivalent or tetravalent interactions (4). The resolution of these structures results in chromosome breakage, rearrangement, and gamete infertility. Diploidization is often required to restore the cell’s ability to stably go through meiosis (2).\n\n3. Reduce costs of maintaining large, duplicated genomes:\n\nLarge genomes are costly to synthesize during replication and hard to maintain (2). The loss of duplicated genes during diploidization effectively reduces the overall size of the genome.\n\nOnce a polyploid is made, either synthetically or naturally, the genome goes through a period of “genome shock”. Genome shock can be defined as a stage in which the genome experiences massive reorganization and structural changes to deal with the external stress (X-ray damage, chromosome duplication, etc.) imposed upon the genome (3). Such changes are termed revolutionary changes and occur early in the process of diploidization (2). Revolutionary changes ensure that the organism has a stable genome that can be passed to its progeny.\n\nAt the end of this process, certain duplicated genes may be preserved thus allowing evolution to shape them into novel functions. This is commonly termed as neofunctionalization. The mechanism of retaining duplicated genes is poorly understood. It has been hypothesized that dosage balance may play a key role in shaping the evolutionary fates of duplicated genes (1). Evolutionary changes refer to the long process of converting duplicated genes into diverse, functional gene derivatives (2).\n\nThere are many ways in which a polyploid organism can convert back to a diploid status. This is usually achieved by elimination of duplicated genes. The main goals of diploidization are: 1. To ensure proper gene dosage 2. To maintain stable cellular division processes. It should be noted that this process does not need to occur rapidly for all chromosomes in one or few steps. In recent polyploid events, segments of the genome may still remain in a tetraploid status. In other words, diploidization is a long ongoing process that is shaped by both intrinsic and evolutionary drives (5).\n\nNormally, homologous chromosomes pair up in bivalents during meiosis and separate into different daughter cells. However, when multiple copies of similar chromosomes are present in the nucleus, homeologous chromosomes can also pair with homologous chromosomes resulting in the formation of trivalents or multivalents (4). The formation of multivalents results in unequal division of the chromosomes and lead to daughter cells lacking one or few chromosomes.\n\nWhen homeologous chromosomes pair up though bivalents or multivalents, illegitimate genetic crossovers may occur (4). Since the chromosomes may differ in genetic structure and content, segments of the chromosome may be shuffled around resulting in massive gene loss. Additionally, illegitimate recombinations may also result in dicentric chromosomes lead to chromosome breakage during anaphase (4). This further contributes to gene loss on duplicated chromosomes.\n\nThe duplicated copies of a gene are commonly non-essential to the plant’s ability to maintain normal growth and development. Therefore, one copy is generally free to mutate/ be lost from the genome (2, 5). This contributes to gene loss through the massive chromosome reorganization events during genome shock.\n\nAs mentioned earlier, duplicated genes are under relaxed selective pressure. Thus it may also be subject to neofunctionalization, the process in which a duplicated gene obtains a novel function.\n\nPolyploidy\n\nPaleopolyploidy\n\nNeofunctionalization\n\n1. Conant, G.C., J. A. Birchler, and J. C. Pires Dosage, duplication, and diploidization: clarifying the interplay of multiple models for duplicate gene evolution over time. \"Current Opinion in Plant Biology\" 2014, 19: 91–98\n\n2. Feldman, Moshe and Avraham A. Levy Genome evolution in allopolyploid wheat—a revolutionary reprogramming followed by gradual changes. \"J. Genet. Genomics\" 2009, 36: 511–518\n\n3. McClintock, Barbara The significance of responses of the genome to challenge \"Science\" 1984, 226: 792–801\n\n4. Hufton, A. L. and G. Panopoulou Polyploidy and genome restructuring: a variety of outcomes \"Current Opinion in Genetics & Development\" 2009, 19: 600–606\n\n5. Wolfe, Kenneth H. Yesterday’s Polyploids and the Mystery of Diploidization \"Nat Rev Genet.\" 2001 May;2(5): 333-41.\n\n6. Martinez-Perez, E, P. Shaw and G. Moore The Ph1 locus is needed to ensure specific somatic and meiotic centromere association \"Nature\" 411: 204-207\n", "id": "54069375", "title": "Diploidization"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54424157", "text": "Biotron\n\nThe Biotron is a research facility located at the University of Wisconsin-Madison that \"provides controlled environments and climate-controlled greenhouses to support plant, animal, and materials research for university, non-profit, and commercial clients.\"\n\nAn evolution of the phytotron, the development of the facility had its roots in the late 1950s as a campaign established by the Botanical Society of America in search of a national phytotron. With additional funding and support by the National Science Foundation the Biotron was eventually envisioned as a combination facility that would allow both plant and animal tests to be conducted.\n\nPlant physiologist Folke Skoog would be instrumental in bringing the Biotron to the University of Wisconsin-Madison. A colleague of Frits Went at Caltech, Skoog oversaw the two proposals the university submitted to the Botanical Society in 1959. The interdisciplinary nature and scope of the project quickly led it to becoming Madison's most expensive facility at around 4.2 million dollars. It was up to Harold Senn, appointed director of the Biotron to concentrate on assembling funding, which he was able to accomplish by January 1963, with the Ford Foundation and National Institute of Health contributing to the project.\n\nThe Biotron was officially dedicated on September 18, 1970 with many experiments under precise controlled environmental conditions already under study, such as a lizard in the Palm Springs desert or black-eyed peas growing in hot and humid Nigeria. When finally completed in 1971, the Biotron contained over fifty rooms with many able to variate temperature from as low as -25C to as high as 50C with humidity adjustable anywhere from 1%-100%. Data from the various tests and sensors would then be fed and logged into a PDP-8/E-AA computer. Senn supposedly spent an additional $3,000 of the Biotron budget on increasing the computer's memory an extra 4 kilobytes.\nIn 1977, the International Crane Foundation brought endangered Siberian crane eggs from the U.S.S.R to the Biotron for incubation and initial feeding. A hyperbaric chamber was added and used for experiments on the effects of diving on pregnancy. A hypobaric chamber was used for high altitude tests of devices administering doses of vaccines and drugs.\n\nAlthough the Biotron went through a period of decline in the 1980s, unlike other facilities it never closed. In 1986, the first experiments using LEDs to grow plants were developed with NASA and tests were performed for the Galileo probe before its 1989 launch. Much of its work in the 1990s partnered with NASA in the Controlled Ecological Life Support System (CELSS) and its goal in researching the viability of certain vegetables for space travel, in particular the potato. Study of animal hibernation were done by ESA for human space exploration.\n\nThe Biotron has 45 rooms that are isolated from sound and vibration with separate air handling and provide control over the temperature, humidity, and lighting. Some rooms specialize in controlling wind, magnetic fields, electromagnetic radiation, or pressure.\n\n\n", "id": "54424157", "title": "Biotron"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54568999", "text": "Biological Hermeneutics\n\nBiological Hermeneutics is the transdisciplinary study of written and printed media using artistic and scientific methods to trace the biological history of the text. For more on transdisciplinary study see transdisciplinarity.\n\nBiological Hermeneutics came into being after the development of the microscope during the 17th century. The most celebrated practitioner Robert Hooke devoted two of his 'Schema' of his ground breaking book \"Micrographia\" to the study of the microbiome of the book.\n\nSchema 12 was drawn from studying the red covers of a ‘small book’ which he judged to be made of ‘Sheeps skin’, he found:… a small white spot of hairy mould, multitudes of which I found to bespeck & whiten [the book]. These spots appear’d, through a good Microscope, to be a very pretty shap’d Vegetative body, which, from almost the same part of the Leather, shot out multitudes of small long cylindrical and transparent stalks …\n\nSchema 33 is dedicated to \"'the study of the small silver coloured\" book-worm'.\n\nThe development of the discipline stalled however with the ascendance of Sir Isaac Newton to the presidency of the Royal Society where he 'did much to obscure Hooke'.\n\nA collection of books maintaining the investigation of the transdiscipline can be found at Chetham's Library where the practice was developed from Hooke's initial investigations through the collecting policy of successive librarians who 'set out to acquire a major collection of books and manuscripts that would cover the whole range of available knowledge and would rival the college libraries of Oxford and Cambridge'\n\nIn order to collect biological material for later study books were sent out into the community as parish libraries. Gorton library is the last surviving example and has yet to be investigated using Biological Hermeneutic techniques.\n\nIn 1831 the foundation of the British Association for the Advancement of Science led to the popularisation of science and enabled a wider group to undertake their own investigations outside of the Royal Society creating a space for the further development of the practice.\n", "id": "54568999", "title": "Biological Hermeneutics"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3630374", "text": "Neural computation\n\nNeural computation is information processing performed by networks of neurons. \n\nNeural computation can be studied for example by building models of neural computation. \n\nThere is a scientific journal dedicated to this subject, \"Neural Computation\". \n\nArtificial neural networks (ANN) is subfield of the research area machine learning. Work on ANNs has been somewhat inspired by knowledge of neural computation. \n", "id": "3630374", "title": "Neural computation"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54976874", "text": "Infectious tolerance\n\nInfectious tolerance is a term referring to a phenomenon where a tolerance-inducing state is transferred from one cell population to another. It can be induced in many ways; although it is often artificially induced, it is a natural \"in vivo\" process. A number of research deal with the development of a strategy utilizing this phenomenon in transplantation immunology. The goal is to achieve long-term tolerance of the transplant through short-term therapy.\n\nThe term \"infectious tolerance\" was originally used by Gershon and Kondo in 1970 for suppression of naive lymphocyte populations by cells with regulatory function and for the ability to transfer a state of unresponsiveness from one animal to another. Gershon and Kondo discovered that T cells can not only amplify but also diminish immune responses. The T cell population causing this down-regulation was called suppressor T cells and was intensively studied for the following years (nowadays they are called regulatory T cells and are again a very attractive for research). These and other research in the 1970s showed greater complexity of immune regulation, unfortunately these experiments were largely disregarded, as methodological difficulties prevented clear evidence. Later developed new tolerogenic strategies have provided strong evidence to re-evaluate the phenomenon of T cell mediated suppression, in particular the use of non-depleting anti-CD4 monoclonal antibodies, demonstrating that neither thymus nor clonal deletion is necessary to induce tolerance. In 1989 was successfully induced classical transplantation tolerance to skin grafts in adult mice using antibodies blocking T cell coreceptors in CD4+ populations. Later was shown that the effect of monoclonal antibodies is formation of regulatory T lymphocytes. It has been shown that transfer of tolerance to other recipients can be made without further manipulation and that this tolerance transfer depends only on CD4+ T-lymphocytes. Because second-generation tolerance arises in the absence of any monoclonal antibodies to CD4 or CD8, it probably represents a natural response of the immune system, which, once initiated, becomes self-sustaining. This ensures the long duration of once induced tolerance, for as long as the donor antigens are present.\n\nDuring a tolerant state potential effector cells remain but are tightly regulated by induced antigen-specific CD4+ regulatory T cells (iTregs). Many subsets of iTregs play a part in this proces, but CD4CD25FoxP3 Tregs play a key role, because they have the ability to convert conventional T cells into iTregs directly by secretion of the suppressive cytokines TGF-β, IL-10 or IL-35, or indirectly via dendritic cells (DCs). Production of IL-10 induces the formation of another population of regulatory T cells called Tr1. Tr1 cells are dependent on IL-10 and TGF-β as well as Tregs, but differ from them by lacking expression of Foxp3. High IL-10 production is characteristic for Tr1 cells themselves and they also produce TGF-β. In the presence of IL-10 can be also induced tolerogenic DCs from monocytes, whose production of IL-10 is also important for Tr1 formation. These interactions lead to the production of enzymes such as IDO (indolamine 2,3-dioxygenase) that catabolize essential amino acids. This microenvironment with a lack of essential amino acids together with other signals results in mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin) inhibition which, particularly in synergy with TGF-β, direct the induction of new FoxP3 (forkhead box protein 3) expressing Tregs.\n\n", "id": "54976874", "title": "Infectious tolerance"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=168986", "text": "Glycogen\n\nGlycogen is a multibranched polysaccharide of glucose that serves as a form of energy storage in humans, animals, fungi, and bacteria. The polysaccharide structure represents the main storage form of glucose in the body.\n\nGlycogen functions as one of two forms of long-term energy reserves, with the other form being triglyceride stores in adipose tissue (i.e., body fat). In humans, glycogen is made and stored primarily in the cells of the liver and skeletal muscle. In the liver, glycogen can make up from 5–6% of the organ's fresh weight and the liver of an adult weighing 70 kg can store roughly 100–120 grams of glycogen. In skeletal muscle, glycogen is found in a low concentration (1–2% of the muscle mass) and the skeletal muscle of an adult weighing 70 kg can store roughly 400 grams of glycogen. The amount of glycogen stored in the body—particularly within the muscles and liver—mostly depends on physical training, basal metabolic rate, and eating habits. Small amounts of glycogen are also found in other tissues and cells, including the kidneys, red blood cells, white blood cells, and glial cells in the brain. The uterus also stores glycogen during pregnancy to nourish the embryo.\n\nApproximately 4 grams of glucose are present in the blood of humans at all times; in fasted individuals, blood glucose is maintained constant at this level at the expense of glycogen stores in the liver and skeletal muscle. Glycogen stores in skeletal muscle serve as a form of energy storage for the muscle itself; however, the breakdown of muscle glycogen impedes muscle glucose uptake, thereby increasing the amount of blood glucose available for use in other tissues. Liver glycogen stores serve as a store of glucose for use throughout the body, particularly the central nervous system. The human brain consumes approximately 60% of blood glucose in fasted, sedentary individuals.\n\nGlycogen is the analogue of starch, a glucose polymer that functions as energy storage in plants. It has a structure similar to amylopectin (a component of starch), but is more extensively branched and compact than starch. Both are white powders in their dry state. Glycogen is found in the form of granules in the cytosol/cytoplasm in many cell types, and plays an important role in the glucose cycle. Glycogen forms an energy reserve that can be quickly mobilized to meet a sudden need for glucose, but one that is less compact than the energy reserves of triglycerides (lipids).\n\nGlycogen is a branched biopolymer consisting of linear chains of glucose residues with an average chain length of approximately 8–12 glucose units. Glucose units are linked together linearly by α(1→4) glycosidic bonds from one glucose to the next. Branches are linked to the chains from which they are branching off by α(1→6) glycosidic bonds between the first glucose of the new branch and a glucose on the stem chain.\n\nDue to the way glycogen is synthesised, every glycogen granule has at its core a glycogenin protein.\n\nGlycogen in muscle, liver, and fat cells is stored in a hydrated form, composed of three or four parts of water per part of glycogen associated with 0.45 millimoles (18 mg) of potassium per gram of glycogen.\n\nAs a meal containing carbohydrates or protein is eaten and digested, blood glucose levels rise, and the pancreas secretes insulin. Blood glucose from the portal vein enters liver cells (hepatocytes). Insulin acts on the hepatocytes to stimulate the action of several enzymes, including glycogen synthase. Glucose molecules are added to the chains of glycogen as long as both insulin and glucose remain plentiful. In this postprandial or \"fed\" state, the liver takes in more glucose from the blood than it releases.\n\nAfter a meal has been digested and glucose levels begin to fall, insulin secretion is reduced, and glycogen synthesis stops. When it is needed for energy, glycogen is broken down and converted again to glucose. Glycogen phosphorylase is the primary enzyme of glycogen breakdown. For the next 8–12 hours, glucose derived from liver glycogen is the primary source of blood glucose used by the rest of the body for fuel.\n\nGlucagon, another hormone produced by the pancreas, in many respects serves as a countersignal to insulin. In response to insulin levels being below normal (when blood levels of glucose begin to fall below the normal range), glucagon is secreted in increasing amounts and stimulates both glycogenolysis (the breakdown of glycogen) and gluconeogenesis (the production of glucose from other sources).\n\nMuscle cell glycogen appears to function as an immediate reserve source of available glucose for muscle cells. Other cells that contain small amounts use it locally, as well. As muscle cells lack glucose-6-phosphatase, which is required to pass glucose into the blood, the glycogen they store is available solely for internal use and is not shared with other cells. This is in contrast to liver cells, which, on demand, readily do break down their stored glycogen into glucose and send it through the blood stream as fuel for other organs.\n\nGlycogen was discovered by Claude Bernard. His experiments showed that the liver contained a substance that could give rise to reducing sugar by the action of a \"ferment\" in the liver. By 1857, he described the isolation of a substance he called \"\"la matière glycogène\"\", or \"sugar-forming substance\". Soon after the discovery of glycogen in the liver, A. Sanson found that muscular tissue also contains glycogen. The empirical formula for glycogen of () was established by Kekule in 1858.\n\nGlycogen synthesis is, unlike its breakdown, endergonic—it requires the input of energy. Energy for glycogen synthesis comes from uridine triphosphate (UTP), which reacts with glucose-1-phosphate, forming UDP-glucose, in a reaction catalysed by UTP—glucose-1-phosphate uridylyltransferase. Glycogen is synthesized from monomers of UDP-glucose initially by the protein glycogenin, which has two tyrosine anchors for the reducing end of glycogen, since glycogenin is a homodimer. After about eight glucose molecules have been added to a tyrosine residue, the enzyme glycogen synthase progressively lengthens the glycogen chain using UDP-glucose, adding α(1→4)-bonded glucose. The glycogen branching enzyme catalyzes the transfer of a terminal fragment of six or seven glucose residues from a nonreducing end to the C-6 hydroxyl group of a glucose residue deeper into the interior of the glycogen molecule. The branching enzyme can act upon only a branch having at least 11 residues, and the enzyme may transfer to the same glucose chain or adjacent glucose chains.\n\nGlycogen is cleaved from the nonreducing ends of the chain by the enzyme glycogen phosphorylase to produce monomers of glucose-1-phosphate:\n\nIn vivo, phosphorolysis proceeds in the direction of glycogen breakdown because the ratio of phosphate and glucose-1-phosphate is usually greater than 100. Glucose-1-phosphate is then converted to glucose 6-phosphate (G6P) by phosphoglucomutase. A special debranching enzyme is needed to remove the α(1-6) branches in branched glycogen and reshape the chain into a linear polymer. The G6P monomers produced have three possible fates:\n\nThe most common disease in which glycogen metabolism becomes abnormal is diabetes, in which, because of abnormal amounts of insulin, liver glycogen can be abnormally accumulated or depleted. Restoration of normal glucose metabolism usually normalizes glycogen metabolism, as well.\n\nIn hypoglycemia caused by excessive insulin, liver glycogen levels are high, but the high insulin levels prevent the glycogenolysis necessary to maintain normal blood sugar levels. Glucagon is a common treatment for this type of hypoglycemia.\n\nVarious inborn errors of metabolism are caused by deficiencies of enzymes necessary for glycogen synthesis or breakdown. These are collectively referred to as glycogen storage diseases.\n\nLong-distance athletes, such as marathon runners, cross-country skiers, and cyclists, often experience glycogen depletion, where almost all of the athlete's glycogen stores are depleted after long periods of exertion without sufficient carbohydrate consumption. This phenomenon is referred to as \"hitting the wall\".\n\nGlycogen depletion can be forestalled in three possible ways. First, during exercise, carbohydrates with the highest possible rate of conversion to blood glucose (high glycemic index) are ingested continuously. The best possible outcome of this strategy replaces about 35% of glucose consumed at heart rates above about 80% of maximum. Second, through endurance training adaptations and specialized regimens (e.g. fasting low-intensity endurance training), the body can condition type I muscle fibers to improve both fuel use efficiency and workload capacity to increase the percentage of fatty acids used as fuel, sparing carbohydrate use from all sources. Third, by consuming large quantities of carbohydrates after depleting glycogen stores as a result of exercise or diet, the body can increase storage capacity of intramuscular glycogen stores. This process is known as carbohydrate loading. In general, glycemic index of carbohydrate source does not matter since muscular insulin sensitivity is increased as a result of temporary glycogen depletion.\n\nWhen experiencing glycogen debt, athletes often experience extreme fatigue to the point that it is difficult to move. As a reference, the very best professional cyclists in the world will usually finish a 4- to 5-hr stage race right at the limit of glycogen depletion using the first three strategies.\n\nWhen athletes ingest both carbohydrate and caffeine following exhaustive exercise, their glycogen stores tend to be replenished more rapidly; however, the minimum dose of caffeine at which there is a clinically significant effect on glycogen repletion has not been established.\n\n\n", "id": "168986", "title": "Glycogen"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55931886", "text": "Bioactive terrarium\n\nA bioactive terrarium (or vivarium) is a terrarium for housing one or more terrestrial animals which also includes populations of small invertebrates and microorganisms to consume and break down the waste products of the primary species. This population of decomposers is colloquially referred to as the \"cleanup crew\" (abbr. \"CUC\"), and can include terrestrial isopods, springtails, earthworms, millipedes, and various beetles as determined by compatibility with the habitat of the primary species (e.g. tropical rainforest vs. desert). In a fully functional bioactive terrarium, all of the waste products will be broken down by the cleanup crew, eliminating the need for cage cleaning and preventing odors. While most bioactive terrariums are also naturalistic (with live plants, soil, lighting, and naturalistic decor), a terrarium may be bioactive without being naturalistic, and naturalistic without being bioactive).\n\nAlthough any enclosure can be made bioactive by addition of a \"cleanup crew\" and appropriate substrate, such enclosures are almost always naturalistic terraria constructed of PVC, wood, glass and/or acrylic; bioactive enclosures in \"rack\" style caging is uncommon. \n\nBioactive enclosures require some form of particulate substrate to provide habitat for the cleanup crew. The choice of substrate is typically determined by the habitat of the primary species (e.g. jungle vs desert), and created by mixing a variety of components such as organic topsoil (free of pesticides and non-biological fertilizers), peat, coco fiber, sand, long-fiber sphagnum moss, cypress mulch, and orchid bark in varying proportions. In wet habitats, there is typically a layer of coarse rocks beneath the substrate to allow drainage, separated from the overlying substrate with a fine plastic mesh. Additionally, some bioactive terraria include leaflitter, which can serve as food and microhabitat for the cleanup crew.\n\nWaste products of the primary species are consumed by a variety of smaller invertebrates, termed a \"cleanup crew\". These can include terrestrial isopods, springtails, earthworms, millipedes, and various beetles, with different species being preferred in different habitats - the cleanup crew for a tropical rainforest bioactive terrarium may rely primarily on springtails, isopods, and earthworms, while a desert habitat would use mostly beetles. If the primary species is insectivorous, they may consume insects in the cleanup crew, and thus the cleanup crew must have sufficient retreats to avoid be completely depopulated.\n\nAdditionally, bioactive terraria typically have a flourishing population of bacteria and other microorganisms which break down the wastes of the cleanup crew and primary species. Fungi may occur, and, if non-toxic, may provide food for the cleanup crew and primary species.\n\n", "id": "55931886", "title": "Bioactive terrarium"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56237498", "text": "Industries et Agro-Ressources\n\nIndustries et Agro-Ressources (also called Pôle IAR) is a French business cluster created in 2005 and located in Hauts-de-France and Grand Est. Its main focus is Bioeconomy.\n\nSince December 2017, its C.E.O is Yvon Le Hénaff.\n\n", "id": "56237498", "title": "Industries et Agro-Ressources"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=816785", "text": "List of popular science books on evolution\n\nThis is a list of popular science books concerning evolution, sorted by surname of the author.\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n", "id": "816785", "title": "List of popular science books on evolution"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1653007", "text": "Cellularization\n\nThe theory of cellularization, also known as Ciliate-acoel theory, is one of the theories explaining the origin of the metazoans. It was first based on Ernst Haeckel's assumption that these beasts are formed from the jaws of fish and that the earliest animals derived from ciliate protozoans. Haeckel later abandoned this idea which is revived by Hadzi in 1953. According to the theory, a multinucleated unicellular ciliate ancestor would give rise to organisms similar to modern turbellarian flatworms by cellularization of the external layer. Recent molecular and morphologic data add increasing evidence against this view, and the alternative colonial theory, also proposed by Haeckel in the 1870s is gaining widespread acceptance.\n\n", "id": "1653007", "title": "Cellularization"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7195477", "text": "Nylon-eating bacteria\n\nNylon-eating bacteria are a strain of \"Flavobacterium\" that are capable of digesting certain by-products of nylon 6 manufacture. This strain of \"Flavobacterium\" sp. K172, became popularly known as nylon-eating bacteria, and the enzymes used to digest the man-made molecules became popularly known as nylonase.\n\nIn 1975, a team of Japanese scientists discovered a strain of \"Flavobacterium\", living in ponds containing waste water from a nylon factory, that was capable of digesting certain byproducts of nylon 6 manufacture, such as the linear dimer of 6-aminohexanoate. These substances are not known to have existed before the invention of nylon in 1935.\n\nFurther study revealed that the three enzymes the bacteria were using to digest the byproducts were significantly different from any other enzymes produced by other \"Flavobacterium\" strains (or, for that matter, any other bacteria), and not effective on any material other than the manmade nylon byproducts.\n\nThis discovery led geneticist Susumu Ohno in a paper published in April 1984 to speculate that the gene for one of the enzymes, 6-aminohexanoic acid hydrolase, had come about from the combination of a gene duplication event with a frameshift mutation. Ohno suggested that many unique new genes have evolved this way.\n\nA 2007 paper that described a series of studies by a team led by Seiji Negoro of the University of Hyogo, Japan, suggested that in fact no frameshift mutation was involved in the evolution of the 6-aminohexanoic acid hydrolase. However, many other genes have been discovered which did evolve by gene duplication followed by a frameshift mutation affecting at least part of the gene.\n\nA 1995 paper showed that scientists have also been able to induce another species of bacterium, \"Pseudomonas aeruginosa\", to evolve the capability to break down the same nylon byproducts in a laboratory by forcing them to live in an environment with no other source of nutrients. The \"P. aeruginosa\" strain did not seem to use the same enzymes that had been utilized by the original \"Flavobacterium\" strain.\n\nAs described in a 1983 publication, other scientists were able to get the ability to generate the enzymes to transfer from the \"Flavobacterium\" strain to a strain of \"E. coli\" bacteria via a plasmid transfer.\n\nThere is scientific consensus that the capacity to synthesize nylonase most probably developed as a single-step mutation that survived because it improved the fitness of the bacteria possessing the mutation. More importantly: The enzyme involved has been produced by a mutation completely randomizing the original gene. Despite this, the new gene still had a novel, albeit weak, catalytic capacity. This is seen as a good example of how mutations easily can provide the raw material for evolution by natural selection.\n\n\n", "id": "7195477", "title": "Nylon-eating bacteria"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19163660", "text": "Evolve (TV series)\n\nEvolve is a 2008 documentary television series on History. The series premiere, \"Eyes\", was nominated for an Emmy for Outstanding Science, Technology and Nature Programming.\n\nEach episode attempts to explain the evolutionary origins of a particular trait of living creatures: for example, Tyrannosaurus Rex's 13-inch teeth, the gecko's \"Velcro-like\" toe pads, and the bald eagle's \"telescopic\" vision capable of spotting a hare a mile away.\n\nTo date, there are 11 episodes, which are available to buy in a compilation box set. The box incorrectly lists 13 episodes but does list the correct 11 episode running time total. Topics are of the episode as named.\n\nThe dates of the episodes vary from the different sources available on the internet. The following dates have been compiled from different TV listing websites. Only the airdate of the initial episode is consistent among 4 sources:\n\n\n", "id": "19163660", "title": "Evolve (TV series)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=957529", "text": "The Ancestor's Tale\n\nThe Ancestor's Tale: A Pilgrimage to the Dawn of Life is a 2004 popular science book by Richard Dawkins, with contributions from Dawkins' research assistant Yan Wong. It follows the path of humans backwards through evolutionary history, meeting humanity's cousins as they converge on common ancestors. Dawkins' longest book to date, it was nominated for the 2005 Aventis Prize for Science Books.\n\nRichard Dawkins starts the tale by talking about history. He claims that evolution rhymes and patterns recur. He talks about our universe that has its own remarkable set of laws and constants which are capable of generating us and other organisms living on this planet. Not only it is capable of generating organisms, it is capable of evolving them too. \nHe claims that biological evolution has no privilege line of descent and no designated end. Evolution has arrived at many millions of interim ends and organisms are still evolving. He believes that evolution is directional, progressive and even predictable.\nHe also talks about how homo sapiens tend to think that they are more evolved than other, but that's not true, all the other species have gone through evolution too. They just have inherited different traits that helped them survive through natural selection. Dawkins claims that all species are equal.\nHe uses backward chronology, instead of forward chronology because in backward chronology, no matter where you start, you end up celebrating the unity of life. While going forward just extols diversity. In a backward chronology, the ancestors of any set of species must eventually meet at a particular geological moment. The last common ancestor is the one that they all share which he calls \"Concestor\". The oldest concestor is the grand ancestor of all surviving life forms on this planet.\nThere is a single concestor of all surviving life forms and its evidence is that all that have ever been examined share the same genetic code and the genetic code is too complex to have been invented twice. There is no sign of other independent origins of life and if new ones arise, they would probably be eaten by bacteria. \nThis book is a pilgrimage to discover human ancestors and as it progresses, it meets other pilgrims (organisms) who join humans in order as the book reaches the common ancestor that human share with them. Human only passes 40 rendezvous before hitting the origin of life itself. In each rendezvous, we find one particular ancestor, the concestor which has the same labeling number as the rendezvous. All the creatures in this tale are alive except for 2 classes. The two exceptions are Dodo and Handyman. \nDawkin’s book’s structure is inspired by Geoffrey Chaucer's The Canterbury Tales.\nAt each rendezvous point, Dawkins recounts interesting tales concerning the cousin animals which are about to join the band of pilgrims. Every newly recruited species, genus or family has its own peculiar features, often ones that are relevant to human anatomy or otherwise interesting for humans. For instance, Dawkins discusses why the axolotl never needs to grow up, how new species come about, how hard it is to classify animals, and why our fish-like ancestors moved to the land. These peculiar features are studied and analysed using a newly introduced tool or method from evolutionary biology, carefully woven into a tale to illustrate how the Darwinian theory of evolution explains all diversity in nature.\n\nEven though the book is best read sequentially, every chapter can also be read independently as a self-contained tale with an emphasis on a particular aspect of modern biology. As a whole, the book elaborates on all major topics in evolution.\n\nDawkins also tells personal stories about his childhood and time at university. He talks with fondness about a tiny bushbaby he kept as a child in Malawi (Nyasaland). He described his surprise when he learned that the closest living relatives to the hippos are the whales.\n\nThe book was produced in two hardback versions: a British one with extensive colour illustrations (by Weidenfeld & Nicolson), and an American one with a reduced number of black-and-white illustrations (by Houghton Mifflin). Paperback versions and an abridged audio version (narrated by Dawkins and his wife Lalla Ward) have also been published.\n\nThe book is dedicated to Dawkins' friend and mentor, population geneticist John Maynard Smith, who died shortly before the book went to press.\n\nDawkins uses the term \"concestor\"—coined by Nicky Warren—for the most recent common ancestor at each rendezvous point. At each rendezvous point, we meet the concestor of ourselves and the listed species or collection of species. This does not mean that the concestor was much like those creatures; after the \"rendezvous\", our fellow \"pilgrims\" have had as much time to evolve and change as we have. Only creatures alive at the time of the book's writing join us at each rendezvous point. Except for a few special cases, numerous extinct species and families such as the non-avian dinosaurs are excluded from the pilgrimage.\n\nNote: From the lancelets onward, Dawkins only provides dates under duress stating that, \"dating becomes so difficult and controversial that my courage fails me\".\n\nIn what Dawkins calls the \"Great Historic Rendezvous\", he describes the significantly important event of endosymbiosis, which results in the beginnings of eukaryotic cells. In his estimates, this occurred in two or three steps, roughly two billion years ago. Firstly, bacteria, perhaps related to \"Rickettsia\", entered proto-protozoan cells. For one reason or another, the bacteria were not digested and did not kill the cell. The cell offered protection to the bacteria, and the bacteria provided energy to the cell, resulting in a mutualistic symbiotic relationship. This is the speculated origin of mitochondria. Subsequently, photosynthetic bacteria (thought to be related to cyanobacteria) entered some, but not all, of these mitochondria-containing cells. These ancient bacteria evolved to become chloroplasts, and the cells became the Plant and Algal lineages. Meanwhile, the cells which this second endosymbiotic relationship did not occur in went on to form the Kingdoms Fungi and Animalia, as well as various Protozoa.\n\nChloroplasts and mitochondria have their own genomes, and they replicate independent of the cell in which they live. Dawkins acknowledges how the endosymbiotic theory proposed by Lynn Margulis is now virtually universally accepted.\n\n\n\n\n", "id": "957529", "title": "The Ancestor's Tale"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7731295", "text": "Epic of evolution\n\nIn social, cultural and religious studies, the phrase \"epic of evolution\" has come to refer to a narrative that blends religious and scientific views of cosmic, biological and sociocultural evolution in a mythological manner. According to \"Taylor's Encyclopedia of Religion and Nature\", an \"epic of evolution\" encompasses\n\n\"Epic of evolution\" seems to have originated from the sociobiologist Edward O. Wilson's use of the phrase \"evolutionary epic\" in 1978. Wilson was not the first to use the term but his prominence prompted its usage as the morphed phrase 'epic of evolution'. In later years, he also used the latter term.\n\nNaturalistic and liberal religious writers have picked up on Wilson's term and have used it in a number of texts. These authors however have at times used other terms to refer to the idea: \"Universe Story\" (Brian Swimme, John F. Haught), \"Great Story\" (Connie Barlow, Michael Dowd), \"Everybody's Story\" (Loyal Rue), \"New Story\" (Thomas Berry, Al Gore, Brian Swimme) and \"Cosmic Evolution\" (Eric Chaisson).\n\nEvolution generally refers to biological evolution, but here it means a process in which the whole universe is a progression of interrelated phenomena, a gradual process in which something changes into a different and usually more complex form (emergence). It should not be 'biologized' as it includes many areas of science. In addition, outside of the scientific community, the term evolution is frequently used differently from scientists' usage. Even respected dictionaries may present questionable definitions that are not scientific or only address genetic changes. Unfortunately it is common for the general public to enter into a discussion about evolution with a wrong definition in mind. This often leads to misunderstanding since scientists are viewing evolution from a different perspective. The same applies to the use of the term theory as used in the theory of evolution (see references for Evolution as theory and fact).\n\nThis epic is not a long narrative poem but a series of events that form the proper subject for a laudable kind of tale. It is mythic in that it is a story of ostensibly historical events that serves to unfold part of the worldview of a people and explains a natural phenomenon. It is a form of myth that has an approach to investigation that is empirical or scientific. According to Joseph Campbell myths serve two purposes—provide meaning for a maturing individual (an individuate) and how to be part of a community. This Epic does both.\n\nDr. William Grassie of Temple University writes that the word \"myth\" in common usage is usually misunderstood. In academia it defines \"a story that serves to define the fundamental world view of a culture by explaining aspects of the natural world and delineating the psychological and social practices and ideals of a society\". He suggests that the Greek term \"mythos\" would be a better term to apply to the Epic as it is more all-encompassing. He concluded that there is not yet an interpretive tradition within science and society about this epic of evolution. If anything, there is an anti-interpretation tradition. Consequently, this is dangerous as it is a powerful revelation at this time. Grassie says the Epic is complex and multifaceted, not simple or easy to understand. It takes a romantic vision, philosophical rigor, and artistic interpretations. It requires a consilience of modern disciplines and acceptance of social diversity. The ancient wisdoms of the world's spiritual traditions must be adapted to make the framework to weave the Epic.\n\nE. O. Wilson explained that humans had a need for the epic of evolution because they must have a mythical story or a sublime account of how the world was created and how humanity became part of it. Religious epics fulfill a primal need in this respect as they verify that humans are part of something greater than themselves. The best empirical knowledge that science and history can provide is necessary in order to provide a comparable epic tale that will reliably unite a separated human spirituality. He believes the evolutionary epic can be as inherently noble as any religious epic when it is expressed in a poetic way. In a similar vein, biologist Ursula Goodenough sees the tale of natural emergence as far more magical than traditional religious miracles. It is a story that people can work with in a religious way if they elect to do so.\n\nPhilip Hefner uses the analogy of weaving to describe the Epic. The warp anchors the story and the weft creates the pattern and the tapestry. The Epic, as scientists see it, is the warp and the weft forms the pattern as each of us views it (we are all weavers) but the patterns all have the warp in common. Hefner writes that stories about the evolutionary epic are redolent with ultimacy. It is not science; it is scientifically informed myth, a myth driven by the refusal to give up on the insistence that the natural world and our lives in the world have meaning and purpose. It is a mythical tale of irony and hope that fills a large space in the domain of religion-and-science. Biologist Ursula Goodenough also makes use of Hefner's weaving metaphor.\n\nConnie Barlow and Michael Dowd's Great Story divides the epic into 8 phases eons or eras: the Great Radiance, the Galactic, Hadean, Archean, Proterozoic, Paleozoic, Mesozoic, and Cenozoic. Dowd uses the term 'epic of evolution' to help construct his viewpoint of evolution theology (a form of theistic evolution). His position is that science and religious faith are not mutually exclusive. He preaches that the epic of cosmic, biological, and human evolution, revealed by science, is a basis for an inspiring and meaningful view of our place in the universe. Evolution is viewed as a spiritual process that it is not meaningless blind chance.\n\nLoyal Rue states that there is nothing in the core of everybody's story to rule out belief in a personal deity. However belief in God is not an indispensable part of this narrative and here will be both theistic and non-theistic versions of it. He says it is the fundamental story of matter, created from energy, the organization of that matter into complex conditions, and then via self-organization into diverse life forms. Humans are as other living things—we are by nature star-born, earth-formed, fitness-maximized, biochemical systems. An aspect of the Epic is the evolution of behavior by that biochemical system.\n\nBrian Swimme sees the Epic as a way to gently maneuver a person into the magnificence of the Universe and as an antidote to the unhealthy consciousness of consumerism. It is the way into the future and enabled him to comprehend the cultural significance of this new story of science moving away from a materialistic worldview. It may move science away from its traditional abstractness to the uniqueness found in natural history. To him evolution and creativity are equivalent so it could be the Epic of Creativity (similar to Gordon Kaufman's thinking). Although the Epic is scientific, it is 'definitely mythic'—it has the fundamental nature of being mythic. \"You take hydrogen gas, and you leave it alone, and it turns into rosebuds, giraffes and humans.\"\n\nGordon D. Kaufman sees the Epic as a serendipitous creative process. He states that it is a notion that can interpret the enormous expansion and complexification of the physical universe (from the Big Bang outward), as well as the evolution of life here on earth and the gradual emergence of human historical existence. The whole vast process manifests (in varying degrees) serendipitous creativity, an everflowing coming into being of new modes of reality. In his book, \"In the beginning—creativity\", he says this creative process is God. Creativity, as metaphor, and as defined in the concept of evolution, has possibilities for constructing a new concept of God. The most foundational kind of creativity is found in that of cosmos/biological evolution—a paradigm that is now the organizing principle of all the sciences. It would seem as though he was equating God to the evolutionary story. This is similar to Dowd who sees the facts of Nature as God's native tongue.\n\nEric Chaisson orients his view of the epic around an \"arrow of time\", which he divides into 'Seven Ages of the Cosmos': particulate, galactic, stellar, planetary, chemical, biological, and cultural. However, such a thermodynamic arrow is not intended to be directional, a common misunderstanding; he sees no purpose, plan, or design in evolution, which he regards as unceasing, uncaring, and unpredictable. Chaisson’s strictly scientific analysis of evolution in its broadest sense—cosmic evolution)—implies an unidirectional, meandering process extending from the big bang to humankind on Earth, and continuing while likely producing increasing complexity, perhaps forever, to ends unknown. As a physicist, he is perhaps best known for attempting to quantify the epic of evolution, using the currently known laws of science and the scientific method (with its insistence on experimental tests of all ideas, principally those of energy rate density) in order to empirically discriminate between objective sense and subjective nonsense. What emerges is a grand and inspiring \"scientific\" narrative of who we are and whence we came—the most recent and up-to-date version of this work having been summarized in a long peer-review article.\n\nBron Taylor's \"Encyclopedia of Religion and Nature\" gives four primary categories: cosmic, planetary, life, cultural.\n\nThe creation-evolution controversy goes beyond the field of evolutionary biology and includes many fields of science (cosmology, geology, paleontology, thermodynamics, physics and sociobiology).\n\nAlthough in the scientific community there is essentially universal agreement that the evidence of evolution is overwhelming, and the consensus supporting the neo-Darwinian evolutionary synthesis is nearly absolute, creationists have asserted that there is a significant scientific controversy and disagreement over the validity of the evolution epic.\n\nThe debate is sometimes portrayed as being between science and religion. However, as the National Academy of Sciences states:\n\nDr.John Haught, Roman Catholic theologian, in his \"Science and Religion: from Conflict to Conversation\" suggests a theistic acceptance of the Epic. He says contemporary theology is being changed by evolutionary science. There are many versions undergoing constant revision. He considers evolution to be, at least provisionally, a most appropriate and fruitful scientific framework within which to think about God today and deplores that contemporary theology gets hung up in the creationism controversy. There are liberal congregations these days that may see the epic of evolution as a history about life and the universe that is both scientific and sacred. The profoundly sacred elements of the story warm up the cold technical facts with awe and reverence, giving Nature an inspiring beauty.\n\nEric Chaisson, in his book, \"Epic of Evolution\", concludes that the coherent story of cosmic evolution—a powerful and noble effort—may perhaps be the way to ethical evolution in the new millennium. Although his is a decidedly materialistic view of the evolutionary epic, he recognizes more than most scientists that humanity is part of this grand story and that we have a responsibility to survive as the only sentient, intelligent beings known in the universe.\n\nNot all of the Epic's advocates are distinguished scientists. Some are Christians who consider it a 'narrative of mythic proportions' that contain religious aspects. They see it as a multifaceted concept that that has been in Christian theology implicitly for hundreds of years and is congenial to perspectives that include ultimacy, transcendence, purpose and morality. However, there are both humanists and creationists who dispute this stance, making unclear the many varied theological stories of our world.\n\nIn 1996 the Institute on Religion in an Age of Science held a conference on the epic of evolution. In 1997 the American Association for the Advancement of Science organized a conference on the epic of evolution as part of their program on Dialogue on Science, Ethics, and Religion. In July 1999, The Forum on Religion and Ecology with special support from the Center for Respect of Life and Environment sponsored a conference titled The Epic of Evolution and World Religions. It consisted of a small invitational gathering of scholars of the world's religious traditions as well as a number of scientists and educators. It explored how the creation stories of the world's religions intersect with or react to the epic of evolution. An Evolutionary Epic conference was held in Hawaii in January 2008. It was attended by scientists, artists, educators, and spiritual and religious leaders. \n\nWashington University in St. Louis offers a course on the epic of evolution. The Epic has also been taught at Northern Arizona University. The course engaged the task of formulating a new epic myth that is based on the physical, natural, social, and cultural sciences for which there are as yet few textbooks. The course was presented in three segments: the cosmos before humans appeared, the human phenomenon, and scenarios for the future of evolution. An annual undergraduate course on \"cosmic evolution\" has been taught at Harvard University for most of the past 35 years.\n\nEvolution Sunday, a Christian church event (1,044 Congregations observed it in 2009) arose from the Clergy Letter Project signed in 2004 by 10,500 American clergy. It is spreading internationally and across other faiths. It supports the story of evolution in a manner similar to the Epic (science and religion compatibility) promoting serious discussion and reflection on the relationship between religion and science. \"For far too long, strident voices, in the name of Christianity, have been claiming that people must choose between religion and modern science,\" says Michael Zimmerman, founder of Evolution Sunday and dean of the College of Liberal Arts and Sciences at Butler University in Indianapolis. \"We're saying you can have your faith, and you can also have science.\"\n\nMichael Dowd and his wife Connie Barlow have traveled the US since 2002 by van as nomads teaching his \"Gospel of Evolution\".\n\n\nReading lists – Books of the Epic of Evolution,\nCosmic Evolution\n\n", "id": "7731295", "title": "Epic of evolution"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6947256", "text": "Evolution (TV series)\n\nEvolution is a 2001 documentary series by the American broadcaster Public Broadcasting Service (PBS) and WGBH on evolutionary biology, from the producers of \"NOVA\".\nThe spokespeople for the series were Jane Goodall (overall spokesperson), Kenneth R. Miller and Stephen Jay Gould (science spokespeople), Eugenie C. Scott (education spokesperson), Arthur Peacocke and Arnold Thomas (religious spokespeople). The series was narrated by the Irish actor Liam Neeson.\n\nThe series was accompanied by a book by the popular science writer Carl Zimmer \"\". An extensive website provides teaching resources for each episode's material, including \"The Mating Game\", further looks at Charles Darwin, and an interactive history of speciation in the invented \"pollencreeper\" birds.\n\nThe episode \"What about God?\" features discussion of the issues of evolution and creationism at Wheaton College, an Evangelical Protestant college that teaches evolution but has in the past restricted professors from taking a stance on the literal versus the allegorical interpretations of Adam and Eve in the Genesis account of creation.\n\n\nTV critic Julie Salamon, writing in the \"New York Times\", said that \"[a] powerful sense of drama, discovery and intellectual enthusiasm runs through this rich eight-hour series ... The series covers an enormous amount of ground but doesn't leave you feeling swamped.\"\n\nBeing made and broadcast in the country where creation-evolution controversy is strongest, the last episode \"What About God?\" focused on religion, and \"through personal stories of students and teachers, it offers the view that they are compatible\". Phina Borgeson, Faith Network Director of the National Center for Science Education, provided a Congregational Study Guide for Evolution. Conversely, the Discovery Institute's Center for the Renewal of Science and Culture produced a website to refute the documentary and started a petition it called A Scientific Dissent From Darwinism to show that there were \"scientists that dispute the claims\".\n\n", "id": "6947256", "title": "Evolution (TV series)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15551070", "text": "Evolutionary ideas of the Renaissance and Enlightenment\n\nEvolutionary ideas during the periods of the Renaissance and the Enlightenment developed over a time when natural history became more sophisticated during the 17th and 18th centuries, and as the scientific revolution and the rise of mechanical philosophy encouraged viewing the natural world as a machine with workings capable of analysis. But the evolutionary ideas of the early 18th century were of a religious and spiritural nature. In the second half of the 18th century more materialistic and explicit ideas about biological evolution began to emerge, adding further strands in the history of evolutionary thought.\n\nThe word \"evolution\" (from the Latin \"evolutio\", meaning \"to unroll like a scroll\") appeared in English in the 17th century, referring to an orderly sequence of events, particularly one in which the outcome was somehow contained within it from the start. Notably, in 1677 Sir Matthew Hale, attacking the atheistic atomism of Democritus and Epicurus, used the term \"evolution\" to describe his opponent's ideas that vibrations and collisions of atoms in the void — without divine intervention — had formed \"Primordial Seeds\" (semina) which were the \"immediate, primitive, productive Principles of Men, Animals, Birds and Fishes.\" For Hale, this mechanism was \"absurd\", because \"it must have potentially at least the whole Systeme of Humane Nature, or at least that Ideal Principle or Configuration thereof, in the evolution whereof the complement and formation of the Humane Nature must consist ... and all this drawn from a fortuitous coalition of senseless and dead Atoms.\"\n\nWhile Hale (ironically) first used the term evolution in arguing \"against\" the exact mechanistic view the word would come to symbolize, he also demonstrates that at least some evolutionist theories explored between 1650 and 1800 postulated that the universe, including life on earth, had developed mechanically, entirely without divine guidance. Around this time, the mechanical philosophy of Descartes, reinforced by the physics of Galileo and Newton, began to encourage the machine-like view of the universe which would come to characterise the scientific revolution. However, most contemporary theories of evolution, including those developed by the German idealist philosophers Schelling and Hegel (and mocked by Schopenhauer), held that evolution was a fundamentally \"spiritual\" process, with the entire course of natural and human evolution being \"a self-disclosing revelation of the Absolute\".\n\nTypical of these theorists, Gottfried Leibniz postulated in 1714 that \"monads\" inside objects caused motion by internal forces, and maintained that \"the 'germs' of all things have always existed ... [and] contain within themselves an internal principle of development which drives them on through a vast series of metamorphoses\" to become the geological formations, lifeforms, psychologies, and civilizations of the present. Leibniz clearly felt that evolution proceeded on divine principles — in his \"De rerum originatione radicali\" (1697), he wrote: \"A cumulative increase of the beauty and universal perfection of the works of God, a perpetual and unrestricted progress of the universe as a whole must be recognized, such that it advances to a higher state of cultivation.\" Others, such as J. G. von Herder, expressed similar ideas.\n\nBetween 1603 and 1613 Sir Walter Raleigh was a prisoner in the Tower of London awaiting execution; in this period he wrote a history of the world in five volumes where he described his American experiences and adventures, in it he wondered whether all the new species discovered in the new continent could have found their place on Noah's Ark. A very serious question at the time, he postulates that only animals from the old continent found place on the Ark; eventually, after the Flood, some of these animals would migrate to the new continent and, under environmental pressure, change their appearances to create new species. Fifty years later, Matthew Hale went even further, and said that only the prototypes of all animal species were welcomed on the Ark; these would eventually differentiate after their release. Many clergymen were happy with Raleigh and Hale ideas since they appeared to solve the problem of the Ark's tonnage.\n\nIn his \"Venus Physique\" in 1745, and \"System of Nature\" in 1751, Pierre Louis Maupertuis veered toward more materialist ground. He wrote of natural modifications occurring during reproduction and accumulating over the course of many generations, producing races and even new species. He also anticipated in general terms the idea of natural selection.\n\nVague and general ideas of evolution continued to proliferate among the mid-eighteenth century Enlightenment philosophers. G. L. L. Buffon suggested that what most people referred to as species were really just well-marked varieties. He thought that the members of what was then called a genus (which in terms of modern scientific classification would be considered a family) are all descended from a single, common ancestor. The ancestor of each family had arisen through spontaneous generation; environmental effects then caused them to diverge into different species. He speculated that the 200 or so species of mammals then known might have descended from as few as 38 original forms. Buffon's concept of evolution was strictly limited. He believed there were \"internal molds\" that shaped the spontaneous generation of each family and that the families themselves were entirely and eternally distinct. Thus, lions, tigers, leopards, pumas and house cats could all share a common ancestor, but dogs and house cats could not. Although Darwin's foreword to his 6th edition of \"Origin\" credited Aristotle with foreshadowing the concept of natural selection, he also wrote that \"the first author who in modern times has treated it in a scientific spirit was Buffon\".\n\nSome 18th-century writers speculated about human evolution. John Mitchell, a physician and cartographer, wrote a book in 1744 called \"An Essay upon the Causes of the Different Colours of People in Different Climates\" in which he claimed that the first race on earth had been a brown and reddish colour he said \"that an intermediate tawny colour found amongst Asiatics and Native Amerindians\" had been the “original complexion of mankind” and that others races came about by the original race spending generations in different climates. Between 1767 and 1792 James Burnett, Lord Monboddo included in his writings not only the concept that man had descended from other primates, but also that, in response to their environment, creatures had found methods of transforming their characteristics over long time intervals. He also produced research on the evolution of linguistics, which was cited by Erasmus Darwin in his poem \"Temple of Nature\". Jan-Andrew Henderson states that Monboddo was the first to articulate the theory of natural selection.\n\nIn 1792, the philosopher Immanuel Kant presented, in his \"Critique of Judgement\", what he referred to as “a daring venture of reason”, in which “one organic being [is] derived from another organic being, although from one which is specifically different; e.g., certain water-animals transform themselves gradually into marsh-animals and from these, after some generations, into land-animals.” Some 20th-century philosophers, such as Eric Voegelin, credit Kant with foreshadowing modern evolutionary theory.\nIn 1796, Erasmus Darwin published his \"Zoönomia\", which suggested \"that all warm-blooded animals have arisen from one living filament ... with the power of acquiring new parts\" in response to stimuli, with each round of improvements being inherited by successive generations. In his 1802 poem \"Temple of Nature\", he described the rise of life from minute organisms living in the mud to its modern diversity:\n\nFirst forms minute, unseen by spheric glass,<br>\nMove on the mud, or pierce the watery mass;<br>\nThese, as successive generations bloom,<br>\nNew powers acquire and larger limbs assume;<br>\nWhence countless groups of vegetation spring,<br>\nAnd breathing realms of fin and feet and wing.\n\n", "id": "15551070", "title": "Evolutionary ideas of the Renaissance and Enlightenment"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11039478", "text": "Henry Farnham Perkins\n\nHenry Farnham Perkins (1877–1956) was an American zoologist and eugenicist.\n\nHe was born at 205 South Prospect Street in Burlington, Chittenden County, Vermont in the house where he spent his entire life in the affluent \"Burlington Hill\" neighborhood next to the University of Vermont on May 10, 1877. He was born into a family with Midwestern roots that trace back to \"Mayflower\" passengers, Love Brewster, a founder of the town of Bridgewater, Massachusetts; Elder William Brewster, the Pilgrim colonist leader and spiritual elder of the Plymouth Colony; and William Bradford, Governor of the Plymouth Colony and the second signer and primary architect of the Mayflower Compact in Provincetown Harbor. He was also a descendant of Martha Wadsworth Brewster, a notable 18th-century American poet and writer.\n\nHe was the only son and the second child of George Henry Perkins and the grandson of Frederick Perkins and Harriet Olmstead. Henry's father was a noted American educator, naturalist and Professor of Geology and kindred sciences at the University of Vermont. His father served as Dean of Arts and Sciences, vice president and was appointed interim president of the University of Vermont during World War I. He was also the state geologist of Vermont from 1898 to 1933. He graduated Phi Beta Kappa from Yale University, class of 1867; received the degree of Doctor of Philosophy from Yale in 1869.\n\nHis mother was Mary Judd Farnham, an 1863 graduate of Knox College, and a daughter of Eli Farnham and Jerusha Brewster Loomis. She attended the debates between Abraham Lincoln and Stephen A. Douglas at Knox College on October 7, 1858. It was said of her that she was a woman of superior mental endowments. She was the president of the Vermont Chapter of the Woman's Christian Temperance Union, and was active in her church and philanthropic work. Her first cousin was Dr. George Trumbull Ladd an American philosopher, educator and psychologist.\n\nMary's parents had emigrated to Illinois in 1836 and were the among the founders and pioneers of Galesburg, Illinois. They built a temporary cabin in Log City near current Lake Storey, just north of Galesburg, the settlers having decided that no log cabins were to be built inside the town limits. They were also instrumental in the founding of Knox College. Eli Farnham served as secretary of the Board of Trustees for nearly forty years and also the first school teacher in Galesburg.\n\nHe graduated Phi Beta Kappa from the University of Vermont, Burlington in 1898, received his M.Sc in 1899 and was awarded his PhD in Zoology at Johns Hopkins University in 1902. The title of his doctoral thesis was \"The Development of Gonionema Murbachii\", which was on the development and life cycle of Gonionema murbachii (a type of jellyfish). After receiving his doctorate, he joined the faculty of UVM where he remained until his retirement.\n\nHe married on June 11, 1903 at Baltimore, Baltimore County, Maryland, Mary Edmunds, born at Baltimore, Maryland on October 18, 1874 the daughter of James Richard Edmunds and Anna Smith Keyser. She was the sister of Dr. Charles Keyser Edmunds, one of his fellow graduate students at Johns Hopkins. He was president of Canton Christian College in Canton, Kwangtung Province, China and the fifth president of Pomona College in Claremont, California. Another brother was James Richard Edmunds, Jr., a graduate of the University of Pennsylvania, and a notable Architect in Baltimore, Maryland.\n\nShe was a descendant of John Howland, (c. 1599–1673) who was one of the Pilgrims who travelled from England to North America on the Mayflower, signed the Mayflower Compact, and helped found Plymouth Colony. She was also the great great granddaughter of Thomas Hurst Hughes, the founder and owner of the Congress Hall Hotel in Cape May, New Jersey, and a Republican member of the United States House of Representatives from New Jersey.\n\nHenry and Mary were the parents of two children, Anna Keyser Perkins-Middlebrook, who married as her second husband, Stanwood Wollaston and Harriet Perkins.\n\nIn 1903, he was appointed associate professor of Zoology at University of Vermont, Burlington. He taught biology, entomology, anatomy and physiology, and embryology during the first half of his career. In 1911 was promoted to full professor and served as chairman of the Zoology Department. His sporadic research projects involved field studies in the rapidly fading naturalist tradition: studies of birds, game fish, and marine invertebrates. He retired in 1945 and remained active in the UVM Alumni Association until his death in 1956.\n\nHis interest in eugenics began shortly after the end of World War I. It was after World War I that he learned of a study by the U.S. Army which was used as part of the draft process. The results from the Army study showed that men from Vermont had an inordinately high rate of \"defects\" (such as diabetes, epilepsy, \"deformities\" and \"mental deficiency\"). Perkins saw this as a problem that needed to be fixed. He went about trying to \"fix\" this through investigation and social reform. This reform, as denounced by historian Nancy Gallagher in her research titled \"Breeding better Vermonters\", also targeted French Canadians and American natives in Vermont state, considered \"insane invasion\" to eliminate.\n\nAround the same time, he revamped his Zoology curriculum and began teaching courses specifically on Heredity and Evolution. His heredity class provided the first known venue for eugenics education at UVM and the inspiration for a \"Eugenics Survey\"—a field station to study Vermonters.\n\nHe died on November 24, 1956 in Burlington, Vermont. He is buried in Greenmount Cemetery, Burlington, Vermont.\n\n\n\n", "id": "11039478", "title": "Henry Farnham Perkins"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3645417", "text": "Society for the Study of Evolution\n\nThe Society for the Study of Evolution is a professional organization of evolutionary biologists. It was formed in the United States in 1946 to promote evolution and the integration of various fields of science concerned with evolution and to organize the publication of a scientific journal to report on new research on evolution across a variety of fields.\n\nThe Society was established at a meeting in St. Louis on March 30, 1946. Fifty-seven scientists attended the meeting, which was chaired by Alfred E. Emerson. George Gaylord Simpson was elected as the Society's first President, with E. B. Babcock, Emerson, and J. T. Patterson as his Vice-presidents and Ernst Mayr as secretary. This society grew as an extension of the US National Research Council's Committee on Common Problems of Genetics and Paleontology (later renamed the Committee on Common Problems of Genetics, Paleontology and Systematics).\n\nThe first annual meeting of the society was held in Boston, December 28–31, 1946. A grant from the American Philosophical Society led to the publication of the journal \"Evolution\".\n\nCommonly known as 'evolution meeting,' the annual conference is often held together with the Society of Systematic Biologists and the American Society of Naturalists.\n\nThe society has an official journal \"Evolution\". It was started in 1947 and is published by John Wiley & Sons.\n\n\n", "id": "3645417", "title": "Society for the Study of Evolution"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11080148", "text": "Growing Up in the Universe\n\nGrowing Up in the Universe was a series of lectures given by Richard Dawkins as part of the Royal Institution Christmas Lectures, in which he discussed the evolution of life in the universe.\n\nThe lectures were first broadcast in 1991, in the form of five one-hour episodes, on the BBC in the United Kingdom. The Richard Dawkins Foundation for Reason and Science was granted the rights to the televised lectures, and a DVD version was released by the foundation on 20 April 2007.\n\nDawkins' book \"Climbing Mount Improbable\" developed from the ideas presented in the lectures, and the title itself is taken from the third lecture in the series.\n\nTo start off part one, Dawkins discusses the amazing capabilities of the human body and contrasts these with the limited capabilities of computers and other man-made machines. He uses a small totem pole (which is used in ancestor worship) to illustrate the importance of studying our ancestors to understand how we've evolved. To contrast ease of reproduction with the difficulty of becoming an ancestor, Dawkins uses the example of paper folding to explain exponential growth. Dawkins then tells the audience that exponential growth does not generally happen in the real world - natural factors come into play which control the population numbers, meaning that only an elite group of organisms will actually become distant ancestors. To be in this elite group, the organism must \"have what it takes\" to survive and pass on their genes to offspring.\n\nThe long chain of successful ancestors means that the probability of our existence is very small, and we are lucky to be alive. By turning down the lights and shining a small spotlight on a large ruler in front of him, Dawkins illustrates the darkness of the distant past and of the unknown future.\n\nAfter expounding on how lucky we are to be alive, and urging us not to waste the precious time that we have, Dawkins brings up the usefulness of science in aiding our understanding of the universe. He mentions the reply that Michael Faraday gave to Sir Robert Peel when asked about the use of science. Faraday's response was \"What is the use of a baby?\" Dawkins explains that Faraday was either referring to the vast potential of a baby, or to the idea that there must be something more to life than growing up, working, getting old, and dying. There must be a point to it all; Perhaps science can uncover the answers to our biggest questions.\n\nTo shake off the \"anesthetic of familiarity,\" Dawkins shows the audience a number of strange terrestrial organisms which he humorously nicknames \"By-Jovians,\" playing off a term we might use to refer to living organisms from another planet, for instance Jupiter. He uses a scanning electron microscope to look at small organisms including mites, mosquitoes, and a bee being parasitized by a strepsiptera. Using a model of a eukaryotic cell, he discusses the mitochondria and presents the audience with a complicated diagram of the metabolic pathways.\n\nDawkins suggests that we can also shake off the familiarity by stepping backwards in time. By using a single pace to represent going back 1000 years, he starts at year zero and takes four steps in front of his desk, going back to 4000 BCE. Pointing to a portrait of Homo habilis, he states that to go back to the time of habilis, he would have to walk about two kilometers. He has audience members hold up portraits of other human ancestors, telling them how far he would have to walk to get back to the time of each one.\n\nBy imagining what an advanced alien species would think of humans if they were to arrive on Earth, Dawkins suggests that their science would be similar to ours. They would know about pi, the Pythagorean theorem, and the theory of relativity. However, Dawkins explains that the alien anthropologists would most likely scoff at our local, parochial religious beliefs. He then contrasts evidence-based beliefs with revealed, tradition-based, and authority-based beliefs.\n\nTo explain the problem with beliefs in the supernatural, Dawkins conducts a small experiment with the audience to \"find the psychic.\" Using a coin, he assigns half the audience to will it to land on heads, and assigns the other half to will it to land on tails. After each flip, the section of the audience that was wrong is eliminated from the experiment, and he repeats the experiment using the remainder. After eight coin flips, only one boy in the audience remains. Dawkins then asks the question \"Is he psychic?\" Obviously, because of how the experiment was set up, one person was bound to have been correct about the result of each coin flip. Dawkins argues that this is exactly how seemingly supernatural events occur in the real world, especially when the \"audience\" is the entire population of the planet.\n\nTo conclude the lecture, Dawkins claims that there is nothing wrong with having faith in a proper scientific prediction. To illustrate this, he takes a cannonball which has been suspended from the ceiling with a rope, pulls it aside and touches it to his forehead. He announces that he is going to release the cannonball, letting it swing away from him, and that when it comes back to him, he is going to ignore his natural instinct to run because he has faith in his scientific prediction of what will happen - the cannonball should stop about an inch short of his forehead. He releases the cannonball, and his prediction is proved correct.\n\nDawkins' second lecture of the series examines the problem of design. He presents the audience with a number of simple objects, such as rocks and crystals, and notes that these objects have been formed by simple laws of physics and are therefore not designed. He then examines some designed objects - including a microscope, an electronic calculator, a pocket watch,\nand a clay pot - and notes that none of these objects could have possibly come about by sheer luck. Dawkins then discusses what he calls \"designoid objects\", which are complex objects that are neither simple, nor designed. Not only are they complex on the outside, they are also complex on the inside - perhaps billions of times more complex than a designed object such as a microscope.\n\nDawkins then shows the audience a number of designed and designoid objects, including the pitcher plant, megalithic mounds built by the compass termite, and pots made by trapdoor spiders, potter wasps, and mason bees. He examines some designoid objects that use camouflage, such as a grasshopper that looks like a stone, a sea horse that looks like sea weed, a leaf insect, a green snake, a stick insect, and a collection of butterflies that look like dead leaves when their wings are closed. Dawkins notes that many animals share similar types of camouflage or protection because of a process called convergent evolution. Examples of such designoid objects include the hedgehog and the spiny anteater (both of which evolved pointed spines along their back) and the marsupial wolf (which looks like a dog but is actually a marsupial). He illustrates the reason why convergent evolution occurs by using two small models of commercial aircraft. The reason they look similar isn't due to industrial espionage, it is due to the fact that they are both built to fly, so they must make use of similar design principles.\n\nUsing a camera and a model eye, Dawkins then compares the designed camera with the designoid eye. Both are involved in similar processes - using a lens to direct light onto a film or a retina. Both the camera and the eye also have an iris, which is used to control the amount of light which is allowed in. Using a volunteer from the audience, Dawkins demonstrates the contraction of the human\niris by shining a light into her right eye.\n\nThe lecture then moves into an explanation of natural selection, which brings forth designoid objects. To explain natural selection, Dawkins first explains artificial selection by discussing the evolution of wild cabbage into broccoli, cauliflower, cabbage, red cabbage, kohlrabi, and Brussels sprouts. He continues the discussion of artificial selection by explaining the evolution of the ancestral wolf into the many varieties of modern dog. Starting with the ancestral wolf, Dawkins imagines that everyone on one side of the room is breeding for small wolves, while everyone on the other side is breeding for big wolves. By selectively breeding the smallest or largest of each litter for a number of years, you may eventually end up with something like the Chihuahua on one side of the room, and something like a Great Dane on the other side of the room.\n\nDawkins then introduces an Arthromorphs computer program (similar to the Biomorphs program), explaining how it works while a volunteer uses the computer to selectively breed more and more generations.\n\nAt this point, Dawkins switches from explaining artificial selection to explaining natural selection. To demonstrate natural selection in a computer program, Dawkins uses a program written by Peter Fuchs to simulate the evolution of the spiderweb. The program builds \"genetic\" variations of a parent web, as if the web was actually being built by a child spider. For each generation, a simulation is run which randomly generates flies - some of which will hit the web, and others that will miss it. The child web that is able to capture the highest number of flies is selected as the parent for the next generation of webs. Dawkins shows the audience the \"fossil record\" that the program recorded after simulating a large number of generations overnight. The web starts off very simple and inefficient, but by the end it has evolved into a web that is highly efficient and highly complex. This is the same process that has led to the existence of all designoid objects.\n\nDawkins now discusses the most popular alternative to natural selection, which is known as creationism. He explains that creationists mistakenly believe designoid objects to be designed objects created by a divine being. Quoting from William Paley's \"Natural Theology\", Dawkins discusses the argument from design using the example of the watch and the watchmaker. Even though designoid objects appear to be designed, Darwin proved that this is not the case. Although Darwin's theory was discovered well after Paley developed his watchmaker argument, Dawkins explains that the argument of a divine watchmaker was still a bad argument, even in Paley's day. Paraphrasing David Hume, Dawkins explains that anything capable of creating humans must itself be highly complicated. Thus, the argument from design actually explains nothing - \"shooting itself in the foot.\" While it is true that designoid objects cannot come about by chance, evolution provides a non-random method of creation - namely, natural selection.\n\nAfter developing the argument against a divine creator, Dawkins examines a number of designoid objects that contain imperfections, which is something you would not expect to find in an object that is supposedly created by a divine being. Showing the audience a halibut flatfish, he explains how they evolved from an upright swimming ancestor with one eye on each side of the head into a bottom-hugging flatfish with a distorted set of eyes on one side of the body. Dawkins claims that this is poorly designed, as any proper engineer would design an organism more like a skate, which flattened out on its belly instead of on its side. This is an example of something you would expect from an evolved/designoid object, but not something you would expect from a created/designed object.\n\nUsing labeled building blocks, Dawkins shows the audience how designed objects came to be. He starts off by placing the simple block on the bottom, and explaining that you don't have to start with a complex being, but can start with a very simple foundation. If you have a simple foundation, you can place the next block on top - the designoid block. From this block, you can get complex organisms. Only after complex designoid objects come to be can you get the final building block of design (microscopes, clay pots, etc.).\n\nDawkins starts the lecture coming in with a stick insect on his hand. He describes with how many details such a being imitates its environment, its almost like a key that fits a lock. He then shows another insect, namely a Leaf Insect, which basically looks exactly like a dead leaf. He gives some more examples for this amazing imitation of the surrounding, e.g. a Potoo, which looks like a branch of tree and a thorn bug, which gains protection by looking like a rose thorn.\n\nHe, once again, makes the point that you can compare these beings with a key, which they represent themselves, whereas nature is the lock. Professor Richard Dawkins then explains that a key has to fit a lock exactly, and demonstrates this with a model of a lock. He mentions that a key is something very improbable. However it is hard to measure the probability of such a key, therefore Dawkins takes a bicycle lock for illustration, where you can calculate how likely it is to open the lock, because there is a fixed number of dials with a fixed number of positions. In Dawkin's case we have 3 dials, with 6 positions each, so the probability that you open the lock by sheer luck is one in 216.\n\nDawkins then shows the mechanism of the lock with a big model: Each dial has to be in the correct position in order to open up the lock. The model is then adapted to demonstrate a staged or gradualist solution to finding the right combination to open the lock. The probability of unlocking the combination in three separate phases falls to one in eighteen.\n\nIn this illustration, Dawkins identifies the role of sub-stages in Darwinian evolution. It is to increase the efficiency of mutation without affecting the probability of evolutionary success. The single stage requires 216, while the series of sub-stages requires only 18 non-random mutations at 100% probability of evolutionary success. That is an efficiency factor of 12 for mutations due to sub-staging without any change in probability. Similar efficiencies are achieved with random mutation without any change in probability.\n\nAfter addressing the claim by Fred Hoyle that probability alone could not produce the complexity of a typed text by Shakespeare, Dawkins introduces the notion of inherited improvements over a number of generations. Nature proceeds through small evolutionary steps,rather than large leaps. This idea is illustrated by a model of the ascent of Mount Improbable, which provides the title for this lecture.\n\nDawkins then illustrates the difference between the reproduction of inanimate phenomena, such as fires spread through sparks, with the inter-generational transmission of DNA in living structures. The gradual evolutionary adaption of these organisms is demonstrated through the examples of the eye, varieties of wings and protective camouflage.\n\nThe example of the gradual emergence of the eye is first shown: starting with a simple light sensitive flat surface and demonstrating the evolutionary benefits of a cone shaped proto-eye for detecting shadows and shapes. Dawkins then relates this model to the simple pinhole eye structure of a nautilus mollusc.\n\nThe benefit of wing structures is illustrated by way of body flattening behaviour in tree snakes, the web like skin of flying squirrels and similar adaptions to be found on flying lizards.\n\nDawkins begins by relating the story of asking a little girl \"what she thought flowers were 'for'.\" Her response is anthropocentric, that flowers are there for our benefit. Dawkins points out that many people throughout history have thought that the natural world existed for our benefit, with examples from Genesis and other literature. Author Douglas Adams, who is sitting in the audience, is called to read a relevant passage from his novel \"The Restaurant at the End of the Universe\".\n\nDawkins then asks his audience to put off the idea that the natural world exists for our benefit. He considers the question of flowers seen through the eyes of bees and other pollinators, and performs a series of demonstrations which use ultraviolet light to excite fluorescence in various substances.\n\nDawkins opens by talking how organisms “grow up” to understand the universe around them, which requires certain apparatus, such as a brain. But before brains can become large enough to model the universe they must develop from intermediate forms. Dawkins then discusses the digger wasp and the set of experiments conducted by Nikolaas Tinbergen of how the digger wasp models the local geography around its nest. He then talks about the limitations of the digger wasps’ brain and concludes that only the human brain is sufficiently developed to model large-scale phenomena about the world. He then shows a MRI scan of a human brain (later revealed to be his own brain) and describes how an image develops from the eye onto the visual cortex.\n\nDawkins discusses how the image on the retina is upside-down and in two dimensions but the overlapping images from each of the eyes are composited to form a three-dimensional model in the brain. He shows this by asking the audience to focus on him while holding their hand at eye level which causes them to see two images of their hand; one from each eye. He then describes how using his finger to wriggle his eyeball that the outside world appears to move because he is moving the image on his retina. However this does not happen when he voluntary rolls his eyes from side to side. This is due to the brain using the internal model to compensate for the relative change in position of images on the retina. Dawkins gets someone to wear a virtual reality headset and move around in a 3-D computer generated world and draws an analogy between the model of the universe developed in one’s head with the virtual reality universe developed in the computer.\n\nHe then goes on the show that the brain uses models to describe the universe by looking at how the brain interprets various optical illusions, such as the hollow-face illusion using a rotating hollow mask of Charlie Chaplin, the \"impossible\" geometry of a Penrose triangle, the shifting interpretations of the Necker cube and the ability of humans to find faces in random shapes.\n\nDawkins then begins to discuss the evolution of the human brain. He shows an animation of the increasing skull size from \"Australopithecus\" to \"Homo habilis\" to \"Homo erectus\" and then finally to modern day humans.\n\nThe ability of a brain to run complex simulations is a powerful evolutionary advantage. Dawkins talks about how this ability to model future events by showing a painting suggesting a hypothetical situation in which a female \"Homo erectus\" uses a mental model of a tree fallen across a gorge as a possible solution to crossing the gorge. The group then burns a tree so that it would create a bridge over the gap. He goes on to describe how the complex modelling ability of the brain may have developed due to this imaginative simulation of various possible scenarios or by the development of language, which would allow ideas to be passed from generation to generation, or by technology, which is an extension of human hands and eyes; or, indeed, if it is a combination of all three.\n\nDawkins concludes that purpose has arisen in the Universe due to human brains. The simulations developed in our brain allow us to develop intent and purpose; and over time our collective understanding of the Universe will improve as we continue to study and exchange ideas.\n\n", "id": "11080148", "title": "Growing Up in the Universe"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3890352", "text": "A Darwinian Left\n\nA Darwinian Left: Politics, Evolution and Cooperation is a 1999 book by Peter Singer, in which the author argues that the view of human nature provided by evolution (e.g., evolutionary psychology) is compatible with and should be incorporated into the ideological framework of the Left.\n\nSinger believes that the Left will be better able to achieve its social and economic goals if it incorporates the more accurate view of human nature provided by evolutionary science: \"To be blind to the facts about human nature is to risk disaster\". For example, Singer argues that the Left's view of human nature as highly malleable, which he identifies with Marxism and the standard social science model, is incorrect.\n\nSinger argues that evolutionary psychology suggests that humans naturally tend to be self-interested. He further argues that the evidence that selfish tendencies are natural must not be taken as evidence that selfishness is right. He concludes that game theory (the mathematical study of strategy) and experiments in psychology offer hope that self-interested people will make short-term sacrifices for the good of others, if society provides the right conditions. Essentially Singer claims that although humans possess selfish, competitive tendencies naturally, they have a substantial capacity for cooperation that has also been selected for during human evolution.\n\nThe philosopher Philip Kitcher has criticised the book's handling of sociobiology, saying that it contains \"credulous retailing of sociobiological speculations\" while noting that \"much of this book is admirable in its clarity, directness, and grasp of central points\".\n\n\n", "id": "3890352", "title": "A Darwinian Left"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28080823", "text": "RedToL\n\nRedToL, or Red Algal Tree of Life, is part of the collaborative National Science Foundation Assembling the Tree of Life activity (AToL), funded through the Division of Environmental Biology, Directorate for Biological Sciences. The overall goal of AToL is to resolve evolutionary relationships for large groups of organisms throughout the history of life, with the research often involving large teams working across institutions and disciplines. Investigators are typically supported for projects in data acquisition, analysis, algorithm development and dissemination in computational phylogenetics and phyloinformatics.\n\nThe Phylogenetic and Genomic Approaches to Reconstructing the Red Algal Tree of Life focus on the Rhodophyta (red algae), one of the most ancient eukaryotic phyla with fossil evidence for Bangiales stretching back 1.2 billion years. Red algae are not only key members of marine and freshwater aquatic environments but they are sources for important human foods such as dulse and sushi wrap, and have a multitude of pharmaceutical and industrial uses (e.g., agarose and carrageenans). Perhaps most important is the role red algae played in symbiogenesis. A red alga was the ancient (>1 billion years ago) donor of the plastid in chlorophyll c-containing algae (heterokonta or stramenophiles) that rose to prominence in marine ecosystems after the end of Permian with groups such as diatoms currently providing ca. 20% of global fixed carbon.\n\nThe aims of RedToL are: 1) reconstruct a robust phylogeny of 471 red algal species using a concatenated dataset of 2 nuclear, 4 plastid, and 2 mitochondrial encoded gene markers; 2) sequence plastid genomes and generate transcriptome databases for 16 key taxa that represent the phylogenetic (e.g., class- and order-level) breadth of the red algae, 3) make freely available red algal multi-gene and genome data via release to GenBank and a project-specific web site. The outreach and student mentoring program is an important component of the RedToL initiative.\n\nThe 471 chosen species from 294 genera represent the diversity of ca. 6,000 red algal species (i.e., ca. 35% of all red algal genera will be included, which represent all extant orders). The robust phylogenetic framework resulting from this study is the basis for a comprehensive taxonomic revision of the red algae and provides the basis for interpreting key innovations during red algal evolution. Because the chosen marker genes are shared across different Assembling the Tree of Life (AToL) projects, it will provide a common framework for a future comprehensive eukaryotic tree. Complete plastid genome and transcriptome data from 16 major red algal taxa will provide a genome inventory to facilitate understanding of red algal evolution, as well as provide the basis for phylogenetic analyses using a rich set (i.e., 100s) of vertically inherited genes. The genome data will specifically test the relationships among the major classes and orders of red algae. The RedToL team members come from eight institutions including two foreign collaborators and fifteen advisory board members and represent the most prominent active national and international red algal specialists from different generations who use different methods (from taxonomy to phylogenomics) to enhance understanding of red algal biology.\n\n", "id": "28080823", "title": "RedToL"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=522768", "text": "Aquatic adaptation\n\nSeveral animal groups have undergone aquatic adaptation, going from being purely terrestrial animals to living at least part of the time in water. The adaptations in early speciation tend to develop as the animal ventures into water in order to find available food. As successive generations spend more time in the water, natural selection causes the acquisition of more adaptations. Animals of later generations may spend the majority of their life in the water, coming ashore for mating. Finally, fully adapted animals may take to mating and birthing in water.\n\n\"Archelon\" is a type of giant sea turtle dating from the Cretaceous Period, now long extinct. Its smaller cousins survive as the sea turtles of today.\n\n\"Mesosaurus\" (and other mesosaurids) were another group of anapsid reptiles to secondarily return to the sea, eschewing shells, and are also long extinct.\n\nLiving at the same time as, but not closely related to, dinosaurs, the mosasaurs resembled crocodiles but were more strongly adapted to marine life. They became extinct 66 million years ago, at the same time as the dinosaurs. \n\nModern diapsids which have made their own adaptions to allow them to spend significant time in the water include marine iguanas and marine crocodiles. Sea snakes are extensively adapted to the marine environment, giving birth to live offspring in the same way as the Euryapsida (see below) and are largely incapable of terrestrial activity. The arc of their adaptation is evident by observing the primitive Laticauda genus, which must return to land to lay eggs.\n\nThese marine reptiles had ancestors who moved back into the oceans. In the case of ichthyosaurs adapting as fully as the dolphins they superficially resemble, even giving birth to live offspring instead of laying eggs. Euryapsida is now no longer considered a valid taxonomic group (Motani, 2009).\n\nDuring the Paleocene Epoch (about 66 - 55 million years ago), a group of wolf-like artiodactyls related to \"Pakicetus\" began pursuing an amphibious lifestyle in rivers or shallow seas. They were the ancestors of modern whales, dolphins, and porpoises. The cetacea are extensively adapted to marine life and cannot survive on land at all. Their adaptation can be seen in many unique physiognomic characteristics such as the dorsal blowhole, baleen teeth, and the cranial 'melon' organ used for aquatic echolocation. The closest extant terrestrial relative to the whale is the hippopotamus, which spends much of its time in the water and whose name literally means \"horse of the river\".\n\nThe ancestors of the dugong and manatees first appeared in the fossil record about 45 to 50 million years ago in the ocean.\n\nThe fossil records show that phocids existed 12 to 15 million years ago, and odobenids about 14 million years ago. Their common ancestor must have existed even earlier than that.\n\nAlthough polar bears spend most of their time on the ice rather than in the water, polar bears show the beginnings of aquatic adaptation to swimming (high levels of body fat and nostrils that are able to close), diving, and thermoregulation. Distinctly polar bear fossils can be dated to about 100,000 years ago. The polar bear has thick fur and layers of fat on its body to protect it from the cold.\n\nProponents of the aquatic ape hypothesis believe that part of human evolution includes some aquatic adaptation, which has been said to explain human hairlessness, bipedalism, increased subcutaneous fat, descended larynx, vernix caseosa, a hooded nose and various other physiological and anatomical changes. The idea is not accepted by most scholars who study human evolution.\n", "id": "522768", "title": "Aquatic adaptation"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7815174", "text": "Entropy and life\n\nResearch concerning the relationship between the thermodynamic quantity entropy and the evolution of life began around the turn of the 20th century. In 1910, American historian Henry Adams printed and distributed to university libraries and history professors the small volume \"A Letter to American Teachers of History\" proposing a theory of history based on the second law of thermodynamics and on the principle of entropy. The 1944 book \"What is Life?\" by Nobel-laureate physicist Erwin Schrödinger stimulated research in the field. In his book, Schrödinger originally stated that life feeds on negative entropy, or negentropy as it is sometimes called, but in a later edition corrected himself in response to complaints and stated the true source is free energy. More recent work has restricted the discussion to Gibbs free energy because biological processes on Earth normally occur at a constant temperature and pressure, such as in the atmosphere or at the bottom of an ocean, but not across both over short periods of time for individual organisms.\n\nIn 1863, Rudolf Clausius published his noted memoir \"On the Concentration of Rays of Heat and Light, and on the Limits of its Action\" wherein he outlined a preliminary relationship, as based on his own work and that of William Thomson (Lord Kelvin), between his newly developed concept of entropy and life. Building on this, one of the first to speculate on a possible thermodynamic perspective of evolution was the Austrian physicist Ludwig Boltzmann. In 1875, building on the works of Clausius and Kelvin, Boltzmann reasoned:\n\nIn 1876, American civil engineer Richard Sears McCulloh, in his \"Treatise on the Mechanical Theory of Heat and its Application to the Steam-Engine\", which was an early thermodynamics textbook, states, after speaking about the laws of the physical world, that \"there are none that are established on a firmer basis than the two general propositions of Joule and Carnot; which constitute the fundamental laws of our subject.\" McCulloch then goes on to show that these two laws may be combined in a single expression as follows:\n\nwhere\n\nMcCulloch then declares that the applications of these two laws, i.e. what are currently known as the first law of thermodynamics and the second law of thermodynamics, are innumerable. He then states:\n\nMcCulloch then gives a few of what he calls the “more interesting examples” of the application of these laws in extent and utility. The first example he gives is physiology, wherein he states that “the body of an animal, not less than a steamer, or a locomotive, is truly a heat engine, and the consumption of food in the one is precisely analogous to the burning of fuel in the other; in both, the chemical process is the same: that called combustion.” He then incorporates a discussion of Lavoisier’s theory of respiration with cycles of digestion and excretion, perspiration, but then contradicts Lavoisier with recent findings, such as internal heat generated by friction, according to the new theory of heat, which, according to McCulloch, states that the “heat of the body generally and uniformly is diffused instead of being concentrated in the chest”. McCulloch then gives an example of the second law, where he states that friction, especially in the smaller blooded-vessels, must develop heat. Without doubt, animal heat is thus in part produced. He then asks: “but whence the expenditure of energy causing that friction, and which must be itself accounted for?\"\n\nTo answer this question he turns to the mechanical theory of heat and goes on to loosely outline how the heart is what he calls a “force-pump”, which receives blood and sends it to every part of the body, as discovered by William Harvey, that “acts like the piston of an engine and is dependent upon and consequently due to the cycle of nutrition and excretion which sustains physical or organic life.” It is likely, here, that McCulloch was modeling parts of this argument on that of the famous Carnot cycle. In conclusion, he summarizes his first and second law argument as such:\n\nLater, building on this premise, in the famous 1944 book \"What is Life?\", Nobel-laureate physicist Erwin Schrödinger theorizes that life, contrary to the general tendency dictated by the Second law of thermodynamics, decreases or maintains its entropy by feeding on negative entropy. In his note to Chapter 6 of \"What is Life?\", however, Schrödinger remarks on his usage of the term negative entropy:\n\nThis is what is argued to differentiate life from other forms of matter organization. In this direction, although life's dynamics may be argued to go against the tendency of second law, which states that the entropy of an isolated system tends to increase, it does not in any way conflict or invalidate this law, because the principle that entropy can only increase or remain constant applies only to a closed system which is adiabatically isolated, meaning no heat can enter or leave. Whenever a system can exchange either heat or matter with its environment, an entropy decrease of that system is entirely compatible with the second law. The problem of organization in living systems increasing despite the second law is known as the Schrödinger paradox.\n\nIn 1964, James Lovelock was among a group of scientists who were requested by NASA to make a theoretical life detection system to look for life on Mars during the upcoming space mission. When thinking about this problem, Lovelock wondered “how can we be sure that Martian life, if any, will reveal itself to tests based on Earth’s lifestyle?” To Lovelock, the basic question was “What is life, and how should it be recognized?” When speaking about this issue with some of his colleagues at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, he was asked what he would do to look for life on Mars. To this, Lovelock replied \"I’d look for an entropy reduction, since this must be a general characteristic of life.\"\n\nIn recent years, the thermodynamic interpretation of evolution in relation to entropy has begun to utilize the concept of the Gibbs free energy, rather than entropy. This is because biological processes on earth take place at roughly constant temperature and pressure, a situation in which the Gibbs free energy is an especially useful way to express the second law of thermodynamics. The Gibbs free energy is given by:\n\nThe minimization of the Gibbs free energy is a form of the principle of minimum energy, which follows from the entropy maximization principle for closed systems. Moreover, the Gibbs free energy equation, in modified form, can be utilized for open systems when chemical potential terms are included in the energy balance equation. In a popular 1982 textbook, \"Principles of Biochemistry\", noted American biochemist Albert Lehninger argues that the order produced within cells as they grow and divide is more than compensated for by the disorder they create in their surroundings in the course of growth and division. In short, according to Lehninger, \"living organisms preserve their internal order by taking from their surroundings free energy, in the form of nutrients or sunlight, and returning to their surroundings an equal amount of energy as heat and entropy.\"\n\nSimilarly, according to the chemist John Avery, from his 2003 book \"Information Theory and Evolution\", we find a presentation in which the phenomenon of life, including its origin and evolution, as well as human cultural evolution, has its basis in the background of thermodynamics, statistical mechanics, and information theory. The (apparent) paradox between the second law of thermodynamics and the high degree of order and complexity produced by living systems, according to Avery, has its resolution \"in the information content of the Gibbs free energy that enters the biosphere from outside sources.\" The process of natural selection responsible for such local increase in order may be mathematically derived directly from the expression of the second law equation for connected non-equilibrium open systems.\n\nThe second law of thermodynamics applied on the origin of life is a far more complicated issue than the further development of life, since there is no \"standard model\" of how the first biological lifeforms emerged; only a number of competing hypotheses. The problem is discussed within the area of abiogenesis, implying gradual pre-Darwinian \"chemical evolution\". In 1924, Alexander Oparin suggested that sufficient energy was provided in a \"primordial soup\". The Belgian scientist Ilya Prigogine was awarded with a Nobel prize in 1977 for an analysis in this area. A related topic is the probability that life would emerge, which has been discussed in several studies, for example by Russell Doolittle.\n\nIn 2013 Azua-Bustos and Vega argued that disregarding the type of lifeform that could be envisioned both on Earth and elsewhere in the Universe, all should share in common the attribute of being entities that decrease their internal entropy at the expense of free energy obtained from its surroundings. As entropy allows the quantification of the degree of disorder in a system, any envisioned lifeform must have a higher degree of order than its supporting environment. These authors showed that by using fractal mathematics analysis alone, they could readily quantify the degree of structural complexity difference (and thus entropy) of living processes as distinct entities separate from their similar abiotic surroundings. This approach may allow the future detection of unknown forms of life both in the Solar System and on recently discovered exoplanets based on nothing more than entropy differentials of complementary datasets (morphology, coloration, temperature, pH, isotopic composition, etc.). \nDetecting ‘life as we don't know it’ by fractal analysis\n\nFor nearly a century and a half, beginning with Clausius' 1863 memoir \"On the Concentration of Rays of Heat and Light, and on the Limits of its Action\", much writing and research has been devoted to the relationship between thermodynamic entropy and the evolution of life. The argument that life feeds on negative entropy or negentropy was asserted by physicist Erwin Schrödinger in a 1944 book \"What is Life?\". He posed, \"How does the living organism avoid decay?\" The obvious answer is: \"By eating, drinking, breathing and (in the case of plants) assimilating.\" Recent writings have used the concept of Gibbs free energy to elaborate on this issue.\nWhile energy from nutrients is necessary to sustain an organism's order, there is also the Schrödinger prescience: \"An organism's astonishing gift of concentrating a stream of order on itself and thus escaping the decay into atomic chaos – of drinking orderliness from a suitable environment – seems to be connected with the presence of the aperiodic solids...\" We now know that the 'aperiodic' crystal is DNA and that the irregular arrangement is a form of information. \"The DNA in the cell nucleus contains the master copy of the software, in duplicate. This software seems to control by \"specifying an algorithm, or set of instructions, for creating and maintaining the entire organism containing the cell.\" DNA and other macromolecules determine an organism's life cycle: birth, growth, maturity, decline, and death. Nutrition is necessary but not sufficient to account for growth in size as genetics is the governing factor. At some point, organisms normally decline and die even while remaining in environments that contain sufficient nutrients to sustain life. The controlling factor must be internal and not nutrients or sunlight acting as causal exogenous variables. Organisms inherit the ability to create unique and complex biological structures; it is unlikely for those capabilities to be reinvented or be taught each generation. Therefore, DNA must be operative as the prime cause in this characteristic as well. Applying Boltzmann's perspective of the second law, the change of state from a more probable, less ordered and high entropy arrangement to one of less probability, more order, and lower entropy seen in biological ordering calls for a function like that known of DNA. DNA's apparent information processing function provides a resolution of the paradox posed by life and the entropy requirement of the second law.\n\nIn 1982, American biochemist Albert Lehninger argued that the \"order\" produced within cells as they grow and divide is more than compensated for by the \"disorder\" they create in their surroundings in the course of growth and division. \"Living organisms preserve their internal order by taking from their surroundings free energy, in the form of nutrients or sunlight, and returning to their surroundings an equal amount of energy as heat and entropy.\"\n\nEvolution-related concepts:\n\nIn a study titled \"Natural selection for least action\" published in the \"Proceedings of the Royal Society A.\", Ville Kaila and Arto Annila of the University of Helsinki describe how the second law of thermodynamics can be written as an equation of motion to describe evolution, showing how natural selection and the principle of least action can be connected by expressing natural selection in terms of chemical thermodynamics. In this view, evolution explores possible paths to level differences in energy densities and so increase entropy most rapidly. Thus, an organism serves as an energy transfer mechanism, and beneficial mutations allow successive organisms to transfer more energy within their environment.\n\nEntropy is defined for equilibrium systems, so objections to the extension of the second law and entropy to biological systems, especially as it pertains to its use to support or discredit the theory of evolution, have been stated. Live systems and indeed much of the systems and processes in the universe operate far from equilibrium, whereas the second law succinctly states that isolated systems evolve toward thermodynamic equilibrium — the state of maximum entropy.\n\nHowever, entropy is well defined much more broadly based on the probabilities of a system's states, whether or not the system is a dynamical one (for which equilibrium could be relevant). Even in those physical systems where equilibrium could be relevant, (1) live systems cannot persist in isolation and (2) the second principle of thermodynamics does not require that free energy be transformed into entropy along the shortest path: live organisms absorb energy from sunlight or from energy-rich chemical compounds and finally return part of such energy to the environment as entropy (heat and low free-energy compounds such as water and CO).\n\n\n\n", "id": "7815174", "title": "Entropy and life"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5730634", "text": "Junkyard tornado\n\nThe junkyard tornado is an argument used to deride the probability of abiogenesis as comparable to \"the chance that a tornado sweeping through a junkyard might assemble a Boeing 747.\" It was used originally by Fred Hoyle, in which he applied statistical analysis to the origin of life, but similar observations predate Hoyle and have been found all the way back to Darwin's time, and indeed to Cicero in classical times. While Hoyle himself was an atheist, the argument has since become a mainstay of creationist and intelligent design criticisms of evolution.\n\nThis argument is rejected by the vast majority of biologists. From the modern evolutionary standpoint, while the odds of the sudden construction of higher lifeforms are indeed improbably remote, evolution proceeds in many smaller stages, each driven by natural selection rather than by chance, over a long period of time. The transition as a whole is plausible, as each step improves survivability; the Boeing 747 was not designed in a single unlikely burst of creativity, and modern lifeforms were not constructed in one single unlikely event, as the junkyard tornado posits.\n\nAccording to Fred Hoyle's analysis, the probability of cellular life's arising from non-living matter (abiogenesis) was about one-in-10. He commented:\n\nThis echoes his stance, reported elsewhere:\n\nHoyle used this to argue in favor of panspermia, that the origin of life on earth was from preexisting life in space.\n\nThe junkyard tornado derives from arguments most popular in the 1920s, prior to the modern evolutionary synthesis, which are rejected by evolutionary biologists. A preliminary step is to establish that the phase space containing some biological entity (such as humans, working cells, or the eye) is enormous, something not contentious. The argument is then to infer from the huge size of the phase space that the probability that evolution yielded the entity is exceedingly low.\n\nSometimes, arguments invoking the junkyard tornado analogy also invoke Borel's Law, which claims that highly improbable events do not occur. The usual argument against Borel's \"Law\" is that if \"all\" possible outcomes of a natural process are highly improbable when taken individually, then a highly improbable outcome is certain. The true law being referenced is actually the Strong Law of large numbers, but creationists have taken a simple statement made by Borel in books written late in his life concerning probability theory and called this statement Borel's Law.\n\nThis \"Borel's Law\" is actually the universal probability bound, which when applied to evolution is axiomatically incorrect. The universal probability bound assumes that the event one is trying to measure is completely random, and some use this argument to prove that evolution could not possibly occur, since its probability would be much less than that of the universal probability bound. This, however, is fallacious, given that evolution is not a completely random effect (genetic drift), but rather proceeds with the aid of natural selection.\n\nThe junkyard tornado is also applied to cellular biochemistry. It is comparable to the older infinite monkey theorem but instead of the works of William Shakespeare, the claim is that the probability that a protein molecule could achieve a functional sequence of amino acids is too low to be realised by chance alone. The argument conflates the difference between the complexity that arises from living organisms that are able to reproduce themselves (and as such may change to become more complex over time) with the complexity of inanimate objects, unable to pass on any reproductive changes (such as the multitude of parts manufactured in Boeing 747). The comparison breaks down because of this important distinction.\n\nAccording to Ian Musgrave in \"Lies, Damned Lies, Statistics, and Probability of Abiogenesis Calculations\":\nThe junkyard tornado argument is rejected by evolutionary biologists, since, as the late John Maynard Smith pointed out, \"no biologist imagines that complex structures arise in a single step.\" Evolutionary biology explains how complex cellular structures evolved by analysing the intermediate steps required for precellular life. It is these intermediate steps that are omitted in creationist arguments, which is the cause of their overestimating of the improbability of the entire process.\n\nHoyle's argument is a mainstay of creationist, intelligent design, orthogenetic and other criticisms of evolution. It has been labeled a fallacy by Richard Dawkins in his two books \"The Blind Watchmaker\" and \"Climbing Mount Improbable\". Dawkins argues that the existence of God, who under theistic uses of Hoyle's argument is implicitly responsible for the origin of life, defies probability far more than does the spontaneous origin of life even given Hoyle's assumptions, with Dawkins detailing his counter-argument in \"The God Delusion\", describing God as the Ultimate Boeing 747 gambit.\n\n\n", "id": "5730634", "title": "Junkyard tornado"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27558974", "text": "Underwater camouflage\n\nUnderwater camouflage is the set of methods of achieving crypsis—avoidance of observation—that allows otherwise visible aquatic organisms to remain unnoticed by other organisms such as predators or prey.\n\nCamouflage in large bodies of water differs markedly from camouflage on land. The environment is essentially the same on all sides. Light always falls from above, and there is generally no variable background to compare with trees and bushes. Three main camouflage methods predominate in water: transparency, reflection, and counter-illumination. Transparency and reflectivity are most important in the top 100 metres of the ocean; counter-illumination is the main method from 100 metres down to 1000 metres; while camouflage becomes less important in the dark waters below 1000 metres.\n\nCamouflage in relatively shallow waters is more like terrestrial camouflage, where additional methods are used by many animals. For example, self-decoration is employed by decorator crabs; mimesis by animals such as the leafy sea dragon; countershading by many fish including sharks; distraction with eyespots by many fish; active camouflage through ability to change colour rapidly in fish such as the flounder, and cephalopods including octopus, cuttlefish, and squid.\n\nThe ability to camouflage oneself provides a survival advantage in the constant struggle between predators and prey. Natural selection has produced a wide variety of methods of survival in the oceans.\n\nIn Ancient Greece, Aristotle commented on the color-changing abilities, both for camouflage and for signalling, of cephalopods including the octopus, in his \"Historia animalium\":\n\nThree main camouflage methods predominate in the oceans: transparency, reflection, and counterillumination. Transparency and reflectivity are most important in the top 100 metres of the ocean; counterillumination is the main method from 100 metres down to 1000 metres; while camouflage becomes less important in the dark waters below 1000 metres. Most animals of the open sea use at least one of these methods to camouflage themselves. Camouflage in relatively shallow waters is more like terrestrial camouflage, where additional methods are used by animals in many different groups. These methods of camouflage are described in turn below.\n\nTransparency is common, even dominant, in animals of the open sea, especially those that live in relatively shallow waters. It is found in plankton of many species, as well as larger animals such as jellyfish, salps (floating tunicates), and comb jellies.\nMany marine animals that float near the surface are highly transparent, giving them almost perfect camouflage. However, transparency is difficult for bodies made of materials that have different refractive indices from seawater. Some marine animals such as jellyfish have gelatinous bodies, composed mainly of water; their thick mesogloea is acellular and highly transparent. This conveniently makes them buoyant, but it also makes them large for their muscle mass, so they cannot swim fast. Gelatinous planktonic animals are between 50 and 90 per cent transparent. A transparency of 50 per cent is enough to make an animal invisible to a predator such as cod at a depth of ; better transparency is required for invisibility in shallower water, where the light is brighter and predators can see better. For example, a cod can see prey that are 98 per cent transparent in optimal lighting in shallow water. Therefore, transparency is most effective in deeper waters.\n\nSome tissues such as muscles can be made transparent, provided either they are very thin or organised as regular layers or fibrils that are small compared to the wavelength of visible light. Familiar examples of transparent body parts are the lens and cornea of the vertebrate eye. The lens is made of the protein crystallin; the cornea is made of the protein collagen. Other structures cannot be made transparent, notably the retinas or equivalent light-absorbing structures of eyes — they must absorb light to be able to function. The camera-type eye of vertebrates and cephalopods must be completely opaque. Finally, some structures are visible for a reason, such as to lure prey. For example, the nematocysts (stinging cells) of the transparent siphonophore \"Agalma okenii\" resemble small copepods. Examples of transparent marine animals include a wide variety of larvae, including coelenterates, siphonophores, salps, gastropod molluscs, polychaete worms, many shrimplike crustaceans, and fish; whereas the adults of most of these are opaque and pigmented, resembling the seabed or shores where they live. Adult comb jellies and jellyfish are mainly transparent, like their watery background. The small Amazon river fish \"Microphilypnus amazonicus\" and the shrimps it associates with, \"Pseudopalaemon gouldingi\", are so transparent as to be \"almost invisible\"; further, these species appear to select whether to be transparent or more conventionally mottled (disruptively patterned) according to the local background in the environment.\n\nMany fish are covered with highly reflective scales, giving the appearance of silvered mirror glass. Reflection through silvering is widespread or dominant in fish of the open sea, especially those that live in the top 100 metres. Where transparency cannot be achieved, it can be imitated effectively by silvering to make an animal's body highly reflective. At medium depths at sea, light comes from above, so a mirror oriented vertically makes animals such as fish invisible from the side. Most fish in the upper ocean such as sardine and herring are camouflaged by silvering.\n\nThe marine hatchetfish is extremely flattened laterally (side to side), leaving the body just millimetres thick, and the body is so silvery as to resemble aluminium foil. The mirrors consist of microscopic structures similar to those used to provide structural coloration: stacks of between 5 and 10 crystals of guanine spaced about ¼ of a wavelength apart to interfere constructively and achieve nearly 100 per cent reflection. In the deep waters that the hatchetfish lives in, only blue light with a wavelength of 500 nanometres percolates down and needs to be reflected, so mirrors 125 nanometres apart provide good camouflage.\n\nIn fish such as the herring which live in shallower water, the mirrors must reflect a mixture of wavelengths, and the fish accordingly has crystal stacks with a range of different spacings. A further complication for fish with bodies that are rounded in cross-section is that the mirrors would be ineffective if laid flat on the skin, as they would fail to reflect horizontally. The overall mirror effect is achieved with many small reflectors, all oriented vertically. Silvering is found in other marine animals as well as fish. The cephalopods, including squid, octopus and cuttlefish, have multi-layer mirrors made of protein rather than guanine.\n\nCounter-illumination through bioluminescence on the underside (ventral region) of the body is found in many species that live in the open ocean down to about 1000 metres. The generated light increases an animal's brightness when seen from below to match the brightness of the ocean surface; it is an effective form of active camouflage. It is notably used by some species of squid, such as the midwater squid, \"Abralia veranyi\". These have light-producing organs (photophores) scattered all over their undersides, creating a sparkling glow that prevents the animal from appearing as a dark shape when seen from below. Counter-illumination camouflage is the likely function of the bioluminescence of many marine organisms, though light is also produced to attract or to detect prey and for signalling.\n\nTop/bottom countershading is common in fish including sharks, marlin, and mackerel, and animals in other groups such as dolphins, turtles and penguins. These animals have dark upper sides to match the ocean depths, and light undersides to avoid appearing dark against the bright sea surface.\n\nMimesis is practised by animals such as the leafy sea dragon, \"Phycodurus eques\", and the leaf scorpionfish, \"Taenianotus triacanthus\", which resemble parts of plants, and gently rock their bodies as if swayed by a current. In the fish species \"Novaculichthys taeniourus\", the rockmover or dragon wrasse, there is a striking difference in appearance between the adults and the juveniles. A juvenile Rockmover resembles a loose piece of sea weed. It swims in a vertical position with its head pointing downwards, and behaves in a way that perfectly resembles the movement of a piece of seaweed: moving back and forth in the surge, as if it was inanimate.\n\nSelf-decoration is employed by animals in different groups, including decorator crabs, which attach materials from their environment, as well as living organisms, to camouflage themselves. For example, the Japanese hermit crab, \"Eupagurus constans\", has the hydroid \"Hydractinia sodalis\" growing all over the shell that it lives in. Another hermit crab, \"Eupagurus cuanensis\", has the aposematic orange sponge \"Suberites domuncula\" which is bitter-tasting and not eaten by fish.\n\nSimilarly, sea urchins use their tube feet to pick up debris from the bottom and attach it to their upper surfaces. They use shells, rocks, algae and sometimes sea anemones.\n\nMany fish have eyespots near their tails, a form of automimicry, to distract attacks away from the vulnerable head and eye. For example, \"Chaetodon capistratus\" has both a (disruptive) eyestripe to conceal the eye, and a large eyespot near its tail, giving the impression that the head is at the tail end of the body.\n\nFish such as \"Dascyllus aruanus\" have bold disruptive patterns on their sides, breaking up their outlines with strong contrasts. Fish like \"Heniochus macrolepidotus\" have similar bands of colour that extend into fins projecting far from the body, distracting attention from the true shape of the fish.\n\nSome fish which mimic seaweeds such as the frogfishes \"Antennarius marmoratus\" and \"Pterophryne tumida\" have elaborate projections and spines which are combined with complex disruptive coloration. These have the effect of destroying the signature \"fish\" outline of these animals, as well as helping them to appear as pieces of algae.\n\nA variety of marine animals possess active camouflage through their ability to change colour rapidly. Several bottom-living fish such as the flounder can hide themselves effectively against a variety of backgrounds. Many cephalopods including octopus, cuttlefish, and squid similarly use colour change, in their case both for camouflage and signalling. For example, the big blue octopus, \"Octopus cyanea\", hunts during the day, and can match itself to the colours and textures of its surroundings, both to avoid predators and to enable it to approach prey. It can perfectly resemble a rock or a coral it is hiding beside. When necessary, in order to scare away a potential predator, it can display markings which resemble eyes.\n\nLike all flounders, Peacock flounders, \"Bothus mancus\", have excellent adaptive camouflage. They use cryptic coloration to avoid being detected by both prey and predators. Whenever possible rather than swim, they crawl on their fins along the bottom while constantly changing colours and patterns to match their background. In a study, some flounders demonstrated the ability to change pattern in eight seconds. They were able to match the pattern of checkerboards that they were placed on. Changing pattern is an extremely complex process involving the flounder's vision and hormones. If one of the fish's eyes is damaged, or covered by the sand, the flounder has difficulties in matching its pattern to its surroundings. Whenever the fish is hunting or hiding from predators, it buries itself into the sand, leaving only the eyes protruding.\n\n\n", "id": "27558974", "title": "Underwater camouflage"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23003393", "text": "Negligible senescence\n\nNegligible senescence is the lack of symptoms of aging in some organisms. Negligibly senescent organisms do not have measurable reductions in their reproductive capability with age, or measurable functional decline with age. Death rates in negligibly senescent organisms do not increase with age as they do in senescent organisms.\n\nThere are many examples of species for whose organisms scientists have not detected an increase in mortality rate after maturity. This may mean that the lifespan of the organism is so long that researchers' subjects have not yet lived up to the time when a measure of the species' longevity can be made. Turtles, for example, were once thought to lack senescence, but more extensive observations have found evidence of decreasing fitness with age.\n\nStudy of negligibly senescent animals may provide clues that lead to better understanding of the aging process and influence theories of aging. The phenomenon of negligible senescence in some animals is a traditional argument for attempting to achieve similar negligible senescence in humans by technological means.\n\nThere are also organisms that exhibit negative senescence, whereby mortality chronologically decreases as the organism ages, for all or part of the life cycle, in disagreement with the Gompertz–Makeham law of mortality (see also Late-life mortality deceleration). Furthermore, there are species that have been observed to regress to a larval state and regrow into adults multiple times, such as \"Turritopsis dohrnii\".\n\nRecent studies have indicated a connection between phenomena related to negligible senescence and the general stability of an organism's genome, specifically transcription processes, over its lifetime.\n\nSome fish, such as some varieties of sturgeon and rougheye rockfish, and some tortoises and turtles are thought to be negligibly senescent, although recent research on turtles has uncovered evidence of senescence in the wild. The age of a captured fish specimen can be measured by examining growth patterns similar to tree rings on the otoliths (parts of motion-sensing organs).\n\nIn plants, aspen trees are one example of biological immortality. Each individual tree can live for 40–150 years above ground, but the root system of the clonal colony is long-lived. In some cases, this is for thousands of years, sending up new trunks as the older trunks die off above ground. One such colony in Utah, given the nickname of \"Pando\", is estimated to be 80,000 years old, making it possibly the oldest living colony of aspens.\n\nThe world's oldest known living non-clonal organism was the Methuselah tree of the species \"Pinus longaeva\" growing high in the White Mountains of Inyo County in eastern California, aged years.\nThis record was superseded in 2012 by another Great Basin bristlecone pine located in the same region as Methuselah, and was estimated to be 5062 years old. The tree was sampled by Edmund Schulman and dated by Tom Harlan.\n\nAmong bacteria, individual organisms are vulnerable and can easily die, but on the level of the colony, bacteria can live indefinitely. The two daughter bacteria resulting from cell division of a parent bacterium can be regarded as unique individuals or as members of a biologically “immortal” colony. The two daughter cells can be regarded as “rejuvenated” copies of the parent cell because damaged macromolecules have been split between the two cells and diluted. See asexual reproduction.\n\nSome examples of maximum observed life span of animals thought to be negligibly senescent are:\nSome rare organisms, such as tardigrades, usually have short lifespans, but are able to survive for thousands of years — and, perhaps, indefinitely — if they enter into the state of cryptobiosis, whereby their metabolism is reversibly suspended. It is hypothesized by advocates of cryonics that the human central nervous system can be similarly put into a state of suspended animation shortly before brain death to be revived at a future point in the technological development of humankind when such operation would be possible.\n\n", "id": "23003393", "title": "Negligible senescence"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7373582", "text": "Transgressive segregation\n\nIn genetics, transgressive segregation is the formation of extreme phenotypes, or transgressive phenotypes, observed in segregated hybrid populations compared to phenotypes observed in the parental lines. The appearance of these trangressive (extreme) phenotypes can be either positive or negative in terms of fitness. If both parents' favorable alleles come together, it will result in a hybrid having a higher fitness than the two parents. The hybrid species will show more genetic variation and variation in gene expression than their parents. As a result, the hybrid species will have some traits that are transgressive (extreme) in nature. Transgressive segregation can allow a hybrid species to populate different environments/niches in which the parent species do not reside, or compete in the existing environment with the parental species.\n\nGenetic\n\nThere are many causes for transgressive segregation in hybrids. One cause can be due to recombination of additive alleles. Recombination results in new pairs of alleles at two or more loci. These different pairs of alleles can give rise to new phenotypes since gene expression has been changed at these loci. Another cause can be elevated mutation rate. When mutation rates are high, it is more probable that a mutation will occur and cause an extreme phenotypic change. Reduced developmental stability is another cause for transgressive segregation. Developmental stability refers to the capability of a genotype to go through a constant development of a phenotype in a certain environmental setting. If there is a disturbance due to genetic or environmental factors, the genotype will be more sensitive to phenotypic changes. Another cause arises from the interaction between two alleles of two different genes, also known as the epistatic effect. Epistasis is the event when one allele at a locus prevents an allele at another locus to express its product as if it is masking its effect. Therefore, epistasis can be related to gene over dominance caused by heterozygosity at specific loci.[2] What this means is that the heterozygote (hybrid) when compared to the homozygote (parent) is better adapted and therefore shows more transgressive, extreme phenotypes. All of these causes lead to the appearance of these extreme phenotypes and creates a hybrid species that will deviate away from the parent species niche and eventually create an individual \"hybrid\" species.\n\nEnvironmental\nOther than the genetic factors solely causing transgressive segregation, environmental factors can cause genetic factors to take place. Environmental factors that cause transgressive segregation can be influenced by human activity and climate change. Both human activity and climate change have the capability to force species of a specific genome to interact with other species with different genomes.\n\nFor example, if a bridge is built that connects two isolated areas to one another, a gene flow door would open. This open door will increase the interactions between different species with different genomes can create hybrid species that can potentially show transgressive phenotypes. Human activity can open the gene flow door by pursuing harmful actions such as cutting down forests and pollution. Climate change on the other hand can open the gene flow door by breaking climate and environmental barriers that were present before. This convergence between species can give rise to a hybrid species that will have more phenotypic variation when compared to the parent species. This increase in phenotypic variation has the potential for transgressive segregation to occur.\n\nIn Kenya, there is an organism called septoria tritici blotch (STB) that diminishes yield in wheat crop. The parent species of wheat had little resistance toward STB, but the hybrid species due to transgressive segregation showed a higher resistance toward STB and therefore a higher fitness. You can create a higher resistance to STB by crossing genes together that are efficient. In result, out of 36 crosses there were 31 that showed a higher mean fitness than the control, parent value. These 31 crosses indicate a higher resistance to STB. The crosses used were from other commercial wheat's that were high yielding which is advantageous because there is a lower chance of deleterious (unwanted traits) appearing and therefore an increase in beneficial traits. Transgressive segregation has been found to be useful to create a resistance toward this organism in order to increase the yield of wheat crop.\n\nRieseberg used sunflowers to show the transgressive segregation of parental traits. \"Helianthus annuus\" and \"Helianthus petiolaris\" are the two parent groups for the hybrids. Ultimately there were three hybrid sunflower species. When compared to the fitness of the parents, the hybrids showed a higher tolerance in areas which the parent species would not be able to survive i.e. salt marsh, sand dunes, and deserts. Transgressive segregation allowed these hybrids to survive in areas that the parent would not be able to. Therefore, the hybrids were populated in areas where the parent species were not. This is due to hybrid species showing more gene expression (phenotypes) than their parents and also having some genes that are transgressive (extreme) in nature.\n\nThere are many ways to test if transgressive segregation occurred within a population. One common way to test for transgressive segregation is to use a Dunnett's test. This test looks at whether the hybrid species' performance was different from the control group by looking whether or not the mean of the control group (parent species) differs significantly from mean of the other groups. If there is a difference, that is an indication of transgressive segregation. Another commonly used test is the use of quantitative trait loci (QTL) to assess transgressive segregation. Alleles with QTL that were opposed (either by overdomiance or underdominance) of the parental parent QTL indicate that transgressive segregation occurred. Alleles with QTL that was the same as the predicted parent QTL showed that there was no transgressive segregation.\n\nTransgressive segregation creates an opportunity for new hybrid species to arise that are more fit than their ancestors. As seen with the STB in Kenya and Rieseberg's sunflowers, transgressive segregation can be used to create a species that is more adaptable and resistant in areas where there is environmental stress. Transgressive segregation can be seen as genetic engineering in the way that the goal for each of these events is to create an organism that is more fit than the last.\n", "id": "7373582", "title": "Transgressive segregation"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10225184", "text": "Oxygen evolution\n\nOxygen evolution is the process of generating molecular oxygen through chemical reaction. Mechanisms of oxygen evolution include the oxidation of water during oxygenic photosynthesis, electrolysis of water into oxygen and hydrogen, and electrocatalytic oxygen evolution from oxides and oxoacids.\n\nPhotosynthetic oxygen evolution is the fundamental process by which breathable oxygen is generated in earth's biosphere. The reaction is part of the light-dependent reactions of photosynthesis in cyanobacteria and the chloroplasts of green algae and plants. It utilizes the energy of light to split a water molecule into its protons and electrons for photosynthesis. Free oxygen is generated as a by-product of this reaction, and is released into the atmosphere.\n\nPhotosynthetic oxygen evolution occurs via the light-dependent oxidation of water to molecular oxygen and can be written as the following simplified chemical reaction:\n\n2HO formula_1 4e + 4H + O\n\nThe reaction requires the energy of four photons. The electrons from the oxidized water molecules replace electrons in the P component of photosystem II that have been removed into an electron transport chain via light-dependent excitation and resonance energy transfer onto plastoquinone. Photosytem II, therefore, has also been referred to as water-plastoquinone oxido-reductase. The protons are released into the thylakoid lumen, thus contributing to the generation of a proton gradient across the thylakoid membrane. This proton gradient is the driving force for ATP synthesis via photophosphorylation and coupling the absorption of light energy and oxidation of water to the creation of chemical energy during photosynthesis.\n\nWater oxidation is catalyzed by a manganese-containing cofactor contained in photosystem II known as the oxygen-evolving complex (OEC) or water-splitting complex. Manganese is an important cofactor, and calcium and chloride are also required for the reaction to occur.\n\nX-ray crystallographic data have been used to propose a structure and mechanism of action for the oxygen-evolving complex and its manganese cluster. Based on structural and spectroscopic experiments, oxygen evolution involves a core three-plus-one cluster of three manganese ions and one calcium ion, with one additional manganese, which are oxidized via intermediate states called \"S-states\". The O-O bond of molecular oxygen is formed between manganese-ligated oxygen atoms at the most oxidized, or S4, state. The procedure of reactions in S-states is almost completely understood by Dolai's S-state diagrams. Ref. Dolai, U (2017). \"Chemical Scheme of Water -Splitting Process during Photosynthesis by the way of Experimental Analysis \". 12(6): 65-67 doi: 10.9790/3008-1206026567. ISSN 2319-7676.\n\nIt was not until the end of the 18th century that Joseph Priestley discovered by accident the ability of plants to \"restore\" air that had been \"injured\" by the burning of a candle. He followed up on the experiment by showing that air \"restored\" by vegetation was \"\"not at all inconvenient to a mouse.\"\" He was later awarded a medal for his discoveries that: \"\"...no vegetable grows in vain... but cleanses and purifies our atmosphere.\"\" Priestley's experiments were followed up by Jan Ingenhousz, a Dutch physician, who showed that \"restoration\" of air only worked in the presence of light and green plant parts.\n\nIngenhousz suggested in 1796 that CO (carbon dioxide) is split during photosynthesis to release oxygen, while the carbon combined with water to form carbohydrates. While this hypothesis was attractive and reasonable and thus widely accepted for a long time, it was later proven incorrect. Graduate student C.B. Van Niel at Stanford University found that purple sulfur bacteria reduce carbon to carbohydrates, but accumulate sulfur instead of releasing oxygen. He boldly proposed that, in analogy to the sulfur bacteria's forming elemental sulfur from HS (hydrogen sulfide), plants would form oxygen from HO (water). In 1937, this hypothesis was corroborated by the discovery that plants are capable of producing oxygen in the absence of CO. This discovery was made by Robin Hill, and subsequently the light-driven release of oxygen in the absence of CO was called the \"Hill reaction\". Our current knowledge of the mechanism of oxygen evolution during photosynthesis was further established in experiments tracing isotopes of oxygen from water to oxygen gas.\n\nOxygen evolution occurs as a byproduct of hydrogen production via electrolysis of water. While oxygen production is not the main focus of industrial applications of water electrolysis, it becomes essential for life support systems in situations that require the generation of oxygen for air revitalization. Human exploration of regions that lack breathable oxygen, such as the deep sea or outer space, requires means of reliably generating oxygen apart from earth's atmosphere. Submarines and spacecraft utilize either an electrolytic mechanism (water or solid oxide electrolysis) or chemical oxygen generators as part of their life support equipment.\n\n\n", "id": "10225184", "title": "Oxygen evolution"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19445663", "text": "Oceanic dispersal\n\nOceanic dispersal is a type of biological dispersal that occurs when terrestrial organisms transfer from one land mass to another by way of a sea crossing. Often this occurs via large rafts of floating vegetation such as are sometimes seen floating down major rivers in the tropics and washing out to sea, occasionally with animals trapped on them. Dispersal via such a raft is sometimes referred to as a \"rafting event\".\n\nColonization of land masses by plants can also occur via long-distance oceanic dispersal of floating seeds.\n\nRafting has played an important role in the colonization of isolated land masses by mammals. Prominent examples include Madagascar, which has been isolated for ~120 million years (Ma), and South America, which was isolated for much of the Cenozoic. Both land masses, for example, appear to have received their primates by this mechanism. According to genetic evidence, the common ancestor of the lemurs of Madagascar appears to have crossed the Mozambique Channel by rafting between 50 and 60 Ma ago. Likewise, the New World monkeys are thought to have originated in Africa and rafted to South America by the Oligocene, when the continents were much closer than they are today. Madagascar also appears to have received its tenrecs (25–42 Ma ago), nesomyid rodents (20–24 Ma ago) and euplerid carnivorans (19–26 Ma ago) by this route and South America its caviomorph rodents (over 30 Ma ago). Simian primates (ancestral to monkeys) and hystricognath rodents (ancestral to caviomorphs) are believed to have previously rafted from Asia to Africa about 40 Ma ago.\n\nAmong reptiles, several iguanid species in the South Pacific have been hypothesized to be descended from iguanas that rafted from Central or South America (an alternative theory involves dispersal of a putative now-extinct iguana lineage from Australia or Asia). Similarly, a number of clades of American geckos seem to have rafted over from Africa during both the Paleogene and Neogene. Skinks of the related genera \"Mabuya\" and \"Trachylepis\" also apparently both floated across the Atlantic from Africa to South America and Fernando de Noronha, respectively, during the last 9 Ma. Skinks from the same group have also rafted from Africa to Cape Verde, Madagascar, the Seychelles, the Comoros and Socotra. (Among lizards, skinks and geckos seem especially capable of surviving long transoceanic journeys.) Surprisingly, even burrowing amphisbaenians and blind snakes appear to have rafted from Africa to South America.\n\nAn example of a bird that is thought to have reached its present location by rafting is the weak-flying South American hoatzin, whose ancestors apparently floated over from Africa.\n\nColonization of groups of islands can occur by an iterative rafting process sometimes called island hopping. Such a process appears to have played a role, for example, in the colonization of the Caribbean by mammals of South American origin (including caviomorphs and monkeys).\n\nA remarkable example of iterative rafting has been proposed for spiders of the genus \"Amaurobioides\". Members of this genus inhabit coastal sites and build silken cells which they seal at high tide; however, they do not balloon. DNA sequence analysis suggests that ancestors of the genus dispersed from southern South America to South Africa about 10 million years (Ma) ago, where the most basal clade is found; subsequent rafting events then took the genus eastward with the Antarctic Circumpolar Current to Australia, then to New Zealand and finally to Chile by about 2 Ma ago. Another example among spiders is the species \"Moggridgea rainbowi\", the only Australian member of a genus otherwise endemic to Africa, with a divergence date of 2 to 16 Ma ago.\n\nHowever, oceanic dispersal of terrestrial species may not always take the form of rafting; in some cases, swimming or simply floating may suffice. Tortoises of the genus \"Chelonoidis\" arrived in South America from Africa in the Oligocene; they were probably aided by their ability to float with their heads up, and to survive up to six months without food or fresh water. South American tortoises then went on to colonize the West Indies and Galápagos Islands. The dispersal of anthracotheres from Asia to Africa about 40 Ma ago, and the much more recent dispersal of hippos (relatives and probably descendants of anthracotheres) from Africa to Madagascar may have occurred by floating or swimming.\n\nThe first documented example of colonization of a land mass by rafting occurred in the aftermath of hurricanes Luis and Marilyn in the Caribbean in 1995. A raft of uprooted trees carrying fifteen or more green iguanas was observed by fishermen landing on the east side of Anguilla – an island where they had never before been recorded. The iguanas had apparently been caught on the trees and rafted two hundred miles across the ocean from Guadeloupe, where they are indigenous. Examination of the weather patterns and ocean currents indicated that they had probably spent three weeks at sea before landfall. This colony began breeding on the new island within two years of its arrival.\n\nThe advent of human civilization has created opportunities for organisms to raft on floating artifacts, which may be more durable than natural floating objects. This phenomenon was noted following the 2011 Tōhoku tsunami in Japan, with about 300 species found to have been carried on debris by the North Pacific Current to the west coast of North America (although no colonizations have been detected thus far).\n\n\n", "id": "19445663", "title": "Oceanic dispersal"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=817175", "text": "Biological dispersal\n\nBiological dispersal refers to both the movement of individuals (animals, plants, fungi, bacteria, etc.) from their birth site to their breeding site ('natal dispersal'), as well as the movement from one breeding site to another ('breeding dispersal').\nDispersal is also used to describe the movement of propagules such as seeds and spores.\nTechnically, dispersal is defined as any movement that has the potential to lead to gene flow. \nThe act of dispersal involves three phases: departure, transfer, settlement and there are different fitness costs and benefits associated with each of these phases.\nThrough simply moving from one habitat patch to another, the dispersal of an individual has consequences not only for individual fitness, but also for population dynamics, population genetics, and species distribution. Understanding dispersal and the consequences both for evolutionary strategies at a species level, and for processes at an ecosystem level, requires understanding on the type of dispersal, the dispersal range of a given species, and the dispersal mechanisms involved.\n\nBiological dispersal may be contrasted with geodispersal, which is the mixing of previously isolated populations (or whole biotas) following the erosion of geographic barriers to dispersal or gene flow (Lieberman, 2005; Albert and Reis, 2011).\n\nDispersal can be distinguished from animal migration (typically round-trip seasonal movement), although within the population genetics literature, the terms 'migration' and 'dispersal' are often used interchangeably.\n\nSome organisms are motile throughout their lives, but others are adapted to move or be moved at precise, limited phases of their life cycles. This is commonly called the dispersive phase of the life cycle. The strategies of organisms' entire life cycles often are predicated on the nature and circumstances of their dispersive phases.\n\nIn general there are two basic types of dispersal:\nDue to population density, dispersal may relieve pressure for resources in an ecosystem, and competition for these resources may be a selection factor for dispersal mechanisms.\n\nDispersal of organisms is a critical process for understanding both geographic isolation in evolution through gene flow and the broad patterns of current geographic distributions (biogeography).\n\nA distinction is often made between natal dispersal where an individual (often a juvenile) moves away from the place it was born, and breeding dispersal where an individual (often an adult) moves away from one breeding location to breed elsewhere.\n\nIn the broadest sense, dispersal occurs when the fitness benefits of moving outweigh the costs.\n\nThere are a number of benefits to dispersal such as locating new resources, escaping unfavorable conditions, avoiding competing with siblings, and avoiding breeding with closely related individuals which could lead to inbreeding depression.\n\nThere are also a number of costs associated with dispersal, which can be thought of in terms of four main currencies: energy, risk, time and opportunity.\nEnergetic costs include the extra energy required to move as well as energetic investment in movement machinery (e.g. wings). Risks include increased injury and mortality during dispersal and the possibility of settling in an unfavorable environment.\nTime spent dispersing is time that often cannot be spent on other activities such as growth and reproduction.\nFinally dispersal can also lead to outbreeding depression if an individual is better adapted to its natal environment than the one it ends up in. In social animals (such as many birds and mammals) a dispersing individual must find and join a new group, which can lead to loss of social rank.\n\n\"Dispersal range\" refers to the distance a species can move from an existing population or the parent organism. An ecosystem depends critically on the ability of individuals and populations to disperse from one habitat patch to another. Therefore, biological dispersal is critical to the stability of ecosystems.\n\nFew species are ever evenly or randomly distributed within or across landscapes. In general, species significantly vary across the landscape in association with environmental features that influence their reproductive success and population persistence. Spatial patterns in environmental features (e.g. resources) permit individuals to escape unfavorable conditions and seek out new locations. This allows the organism to \"test\" new environments for their suitability, provided they are within animal's geographic range. In addition, the ability of a species to disperse over a gradually changing environment could enable a population to survive extreme conditions. (i.e. climate change).\n\nAs the climate changes, prey and predators have to adapt to survive. This poses a problem for many animals, for example the Southern Rockhopper Penguins. These penguins are able to live and thrive in a variety of climates due to the penguins' phenotypic plasticity. However, they are predicted to respond by dispersal, not adaptation this time. This is explained due to their long life spans and slow microevolution. Penguins in the subantarctic have very different foraging behavior than the subtropical waters, it would be very hard to survive and keep up with the fast changing climate because these behaviors took years to shape.\n\nA dispersal barrier may mean that the dispersal range of a species is much smaller than the species distribution. An artificial example is habitat fragmentation due to human land use. Natural barriers to dispersal that limit species distribution include mountain ranges and rivers. An example is the separation of the ranges of the two species of chimpanzee by the Congo River.\n\nOn the other hand, human activities may also expand the dispersal range of a species by providing new dispersal methods (e.g., ships). Many of them become invasive, like rats and stinkbugs, but some species also have a slightly positive effect to human settlers like honeybees and earthworms.\n\nMost animals are capable of locomotion and the basic mechanism of dispersal is movement from one place to another. Locomotion allows the organism to \"test\" new environments for their suitability, provided they are within the animal's range. Movements are usually guided by inherited behaviors.\n\nThe formation of barriers to dispersal or gene flow between adjacent areas can isolate populations on either side of the emerging divide. The geographic separation and subsequent genetic isolation of portions of an ancestral population can result in speciation.\n\nSeed dispersal is the movement or transport of seeds away from the parent plant. Plants have limited mobility and consequently rely upon a variety of dispersal vectors to transport their propagules, including both abiotic and biotic vectors. Seeds can be dispersed away from the parent plant individually or collectively, as well as dispersed in both space and time. The patterns of seed dispersal are determined in large part by the dispersal mechanism and this has important implications for the demographic and genetic structure of plant populations, as well as migration patterns and species interactions. There are five main modes of seed dispersal: gravity, wind, ballistic, water and by animals.\n\nThere are numerous animal forms that are non—motile, such as sponges, bryozoans, tunicates, sea anemones, corals, and oysters. In common, they are all either marine or aquatic. It may seem curious that plants have been so successful at stationary life on land, while animals have not, but the answer lies in the food supply. Plants produce their own food from sunlight and carbon dioxide—both generally more abundant on land than in water. Animals fixed in place must rely on the surrounding medium to bring food at least close enough to grab, and this occurs in the three-dimensional water environment, but with much less abundance in the atmosphere.\n\nAll of the marine and aquatic invertebrates whose lives are spent fixed to the bottom (more or less; anemones are capable of getting up and moving to a new location if conditions warrant) produce dispersal units. These may be specialized \"buds\", or motile sexual reproduction products, or even a sort of alteration of generations as in certain cnidaria.\n\nCorals provide a good example of how sedentary species achieve dispersion. Corals reproduce by releasing sperm and eggs directly into the water. These release events are coordinated by lunar phase in certain warm months, such that all corals of one or many species on a given reef will release on the same single or several consecutive nights. The released eggs are fertilized, and the resulting zygote develops quickly into a multicellular \"planula\". This motile stage then attempts to find a suitable substratum for settlement. Most are unsuccessful and die or are fed upon by zooplankton and bottom dwelling predators such as anemones and other corals. However, untold millions are produced, and a few do succeed in locating spots of bare limestone, where they settle and transform by growth into a polyp. All things being favorable, the single polyp grows into a coral head by budding off new polyps to form a colony.\n\nThe majority of all animals are motile. Although motile animals can, in theory, disperse themselves by their spontaneous and independent locomotive powers, a great many species utilize the existing kinetic energies in the environment, resulting in passive movement. Dispersal by water currents is especially associated with the physically small inhabitants of marine waters known as zooplankton. The term plankton comes from the Greek, πλαγκτον, meaning \"wanderer\" or \"drifter\".\n\nMany animal species, especially freshwater invertebrates, are able to disperse by wind or by transfer with an aid of larger animals (birds, mammals or fishes) as dormant eggs, dormant embryos or, in some cases, dormant adult stages. Tardigrades, some rotifers and some copepods are able to withstand desiccation as adult dormant stages. Many other taxa (Cladocera, Bryozoa, Hydra, Copepoda and so on) can disperse as dormant eggs or embryos. Freshwater sponges usually have special dormant propagules called gemmulae for such a dispersal. Many kinds of dispersal dormant stages are able to withstand not only desiccation and low and high temperature, but also action of digestive enzymes during their transfer through digestive tracts of birds and other animals, high concentration of salts and many kinds of toxicants. Such dormant-resistant stages made possible the long-distance dispersal from one water body to another and broad distribution ranges of many freshwater animals.\n\nDispersal is most commonly quantified either in terms of rate or distance.\n\nDispersal rate (also called migration rate in the population genetics literature) or probability describes the probability that any individual leaves an area or, equivalently, the expected proportion of individual to leave an area.\n\nThe dispersal distance is usually described by a dispersal kernel which gives the probability distribution of the distance traveled by any individual. A number of different functions are used for dispersal kernels in theoretical models of dispersal including the negative exponential distribution, extended negative exponential distribution, normal distribution, exponential power distribution, inverse power distribution, and the two-sided power distribution. The inverse power distribution and distributions with 'fat tails' representing long-distance dispersal events (called leptokurtic distributions) are though to best match empirical dispersal data.\n\nDispersal not only has costs and benefits to the dispersing individual (as mentioned above), but it also has consequences at the level of the population and species as well.\n\nMost populations have a patchy spatial distribution. Dispersal, by moving individuals between different sub-populations, can increase the overall connectivity of the population, helping to minimize the risk of stochastic extinction, since if a sub-population goes extinct by chance, it is likely to be recolonized if the dispersal rate is high.\nIncreased connectivity can also decrease the degree of local adaptation.\n\n\n", "id": "817175", "title": "Biological dispersal"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34920670", "text": "Hologenome theory of evolution\n\nThe hologenome theory of evolution, also known as the hologenome concept of evolution, recasts the individual animal or plant (and other multicellular organisms) as a community or a \"holobiont\" – the host plus all of its symbiotic microbes. Consequently, the collective genomes of the holobiont form a \"hologenome\". Holobionts and hologenomes are structural entities that replace misnomers in the context of host-microbiota symbioses such as superorganism (i.e., an integrated social unit composed of conspecifics), organ, and metagenome. Variation in the hologenome may encode phenotypic plasticity of the holobiont and can be subject to evolutionary changes caused by selection and drift, if portions of the hologenome are transmitted between generations with reasonable fidelity. One of the important outcomes of recasting the individual as a holobiont subject to evolutionary forces is that genetic variation in the hologenome can be brought about by changes in the host genome and also by changes in the microbiome, including new acquisitions of microbes, horizontal gene transfers, and changes in microbial abundance within hosts. Although there is a rich literature on binary host–microbe symbioses, the hologenome concept distinguishes itself by including the vast symbiotic complexity inherent in many multicellular hosts. For recent literature on holobionts and hologenomes published in an open access platform, see the following reference.\n\nIn 1991, Lynn Margulis coined the term holobiont in a book chapter entitled Symbiogenesis and Symbionticism in \"Symbiosis as a Source of Evolutionary Innovation: Specation and Morphogenesis\" (MIT Press). The term holobiont is derived from the Ancient Greek ὅλος (hólos, “whole”), and the word biont for a unit of living matter.\n\nIn September 1994, Richard Jefferson first introduced the term hologenome at a presentation at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory during a Symposium \"A Decade of PCR\", published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press as a video series. At the CSH Symposium and earlier, the unsettling number and diversity of microbes that were being discovered through the powerful tool of PCR-amplification of 16S ribosomal RNA genes was exciting, but confusing interpretations in diverse studies. A number of speakers referred to microbial contributions to mammalian or plant DNA samples as 'contamination'. In his lecture, Jefferson argued that these were likely not contamination, but rather essential components of the samples that reflected the actual genetic composition of the organism being studied, and that the logic of the organism's performance and capabilities would be embedded only in the hologenome. Observations on the ubiquity of microbes in plant and soil samples as well as laboratory work on molecular genetics of vertebrate-associated microbial enzymes informed this assertion (citations needed).\n\nIn 2008, Eugene Rosenberg and Ilana Zilber-Rosenberg independently derived the term hologenome and developed the hologenome theory of evolution. This theory was originally based on the pair’s observations of Vibrio shiloi-mediated bleaching of the coral Oculina patagonica; and since its first introduction, the theory has been promoted as a fusion of Lamarckism and Darwinism and expanded to all of evolution, not just that of corals. The history of the development of the hologenome theory and the logic undergirding its development was the focus of a cover article by Carrie Arnold in New Scientist in January, 2013. The most comprehensive treatment of the theory, including updates by the Rosenbergs on neutrality, pathogenesis and multi-level selection, can be found in their 2013 book.\n\nIn 2013, Robert Brucker and Seth Bordenstein re-invigorated the hologenome concept by showing that gut microbiomes, for the first time, are distinguishable between very closely related Nasonia wasp species and contribute to hybrid death. This publication has formed the basis of the recent resurgence and discussion in holobionts and hologenomes, namely by equating interactions between hosts and microbes as part of a conceptual continuum to interactions between genes in the same genome. In 2015, Seth R. Bordenstein and Kevin R. Theis outlined additional history and summarized a conceptual framework that aligns with pre-existing theories in biology. They discuss questions and critiques, show how neutral and selective processes are applicable to the intellectual framework, and discuss future research questions.\n\nMulticellular life is made possible by the coordination of physically and temporally distinct processes, most prominently through hormones. Hormones mediate critical activities in vertebrates, including ontogeny, somatic and reproductive physiology, sexual development, performance and behaviour. \nMany of these hormones – including most steroids and thyroxines – are secreted, typically as inactivated hormone conjugates to which a glucuronic acid or sulfate has been attached, through the endocrine and apocrine systems into epithelial corridors in which microbiota are widespread and diverse, including gut, urinary tract, lung and skin. There, the inactivated hormones can be re-activated by cleavage of the glucuronide or sulfate residue, allowing the newly re-activated hormone to be reabsorbed. Thus the concentration and bioavailability of many of the hormones is impacted by microbial cleavage of conjugated intermediaries, itself determined by a highly complex and diverse population with redundant enzymatic capabilities. Aspects of this phenomenon of enterohepatic circulation have been known for decades, and represented in a very large and complex literature, but had previously been viewed as an ancillary effect of detoxification and excretion of metabolites and xenobiotics, including effects on lifetimes of pharmaceuticals, including birth control formulations.\n\nThe basic premise is that through the microbial population structure and activity and the diversity of enzyme specificities and kinetic parameters produced by these populations, a spectrum of hormones can be re-activated and resorbed from epithelia, potentially modulating effective time and dose relationships of many vertebrate hormones. The ability to alter and modulate, amplify and suppress, disseminate and recruit new capabilities as microbially-encoded 'traits' means that sampling, sensing and responding to the environment become intrinsic features and emergent capabilities of the holobiont, with mechanisms that can provide rapid, sensitive, nuanced and persistent performance changes. \nStudies by Froebe et al. in 1990 indicating that essential mating pheromones, including androstenols, required activation by skin-associated microbial glucuronidases and sulfatases. In the absence of microbial populations in the skin, no detectable aromatic pheromone was released, as the pro-pheromone remained water-soluble and non-volatile. This effectively meant that the microbes in the skin were essential to produce a mating signal.\n\nSubsequent re-articulation describing the hologenome theory by Rosenberg and Zilber-Rosenberg, published 13 years after Jefferson's definition of the theory, was based on their observations of corals, and the coral probiotic hypothesis.\n\nCoral reefs are the largest structures created by living organisms, and contain abundant and highly complex microbial communities. A coral \"head\" is a colony of genetically identical polyps, which secrete an exoskeleton near the base. Depending on the species, the exoskeleton may be hard, based on calcium carbonate, or soft and proteinaceous. Over many generations, the colony creates a large skeleton that is characteristic of the species. Diverse forms of life take up residence in a coral colony, including photosynthetic algae such as \"Symbiodinium\", as well as a wide range of bacteria including nitrogen fixers, and chitin decomposers, all of which form an important part of coral nutrition. The association between coral and its microbiota is species dependent, and different bacterial populations are found in mucus, skeleton and tissue from the same coral fragment.\n\nOver the past several decades, major declines in coral populations have occurred. Climate change, water pollution and overfishing are three stress factors that have been described as leading to disease susceptibility. Over twenty different coral diseases have been described, but of these, only a handful have had their causative agents isolated and characterized.\n\nCoral bleaching is the most serious of these diseases. In the Mediterranean Sea, the bleaching of \"Oculina patagonica\" was first described in 1994 and, through a rigorous application of Koch's Postulates, determined to be due to infection by \"Vibrio shiloi\". From 1994 to 2002, bacterial bleaching of \"O. patagonica\" occurred every summer in the eastern Mediterranean. Surprisingly, however, after 2003, \"O. patagonica\" in the eastern Mediterranean has been resistant to \"V. shiloi\" infection, although other diseases still cause bleaching.\n\nThe surprise stems from the knowledge that corals are long lived, with lifespans on the order of decades, and do not have adaptive immune systems. Their innate immune systems do not produce antibodies, and they should seemingly not be able to respond to new challenges except over evolutionary time scales. Yet multiple researchers have documented variations in bleaching susceptibility that may be termed 'experience-mediated tolerance'. The puzzle of how corals managed to acquire resistance to a specific pathogen led Eugene Rosenberg and Ilana Zilber-Rosenberg to propose the Coral Probiotic Hypothesis. This hypothesis proposes that a dynamic relationship exists between corals and their symbiotic microbial communities. Beneficial mutations can arise and spread among the symbiotic microbes much faster than in the host corals. By altering its microbial composition, the \"holobiont\" can adapt to changing environmental conditions far more rapidly than by genetic mutation and selection in the host species alone.\n\nExtrapolating the coral probiotic hypothesis to other organisms, including higher plants and animals, led to the Rosenberg's support for and publications around the hologenome theory of evolution.\n\nThe framework of the hologenome theory of evolution is as follows (condensed from Rosenberg \"et al.\", 2007):\n\nSome authors supplement the above principles with an additional one. If a given holobiont is to be considered a unit of natural selection: \n\nTen principles of holobionts and hologenomes were presented in PLOS Biology to clarify and append what these terms and concepts are and are not, to explain how they both support and extend existing theory in the life sciences, and to discuss their potential ramifications for the multifaceted approaches of zoology and botany\n\n\nMany case studies clearly demonstrate the importance of an organism's associated microbiota to its existence. (For example, see the numerous case studies in the Microbiome article.) However, horizontal \"versus\" vertical transmission of endosymbionts must be distinguished. Endosymbionts whose transmission is predominantly vertical may be considered as contributing to the heritable genetic variation present in a host species.\n\nIn the case of colonial organisms such as corals, the microbial associations of the colony persist even though individual members of the colony, reproducing asexually, live and die. Corals also have sexual mode of reproduction, resulting in planktonic larva; it is less clear whether microbial associations persist through this stage of growth. Also, the bacterial community of a colony may change with the seasons.\n\nMany insects maintain heritable obligate symbiosis relationships with bacterial partners. For example, normal development of female wasps of the species \"Asobara tabida\" is dependent on \"Wolbachia\" infection. If \"cured\" of the infection, their ovaries degenerate. Transmission of the infection is vertical through the egg cytoplasm.\n\nIn contrast, many obligate symbiosis relationships have been described in the literature where transmission of the symbionts is via horizontal transfer. A well-studied example is the nocturnally feeding squid \"Euprymna scolopes\", which camouflages its outline against the moonlit ocean surface by emitting light from its underside with the aid of the symbiotic bacterium \"Vibrio fischeri\". The Rosenbergs cite this example within the context of the hologenome theory of evolution. Squid and bacterium maintain a highly co-evolved relationship. The newly hatched squid collects its bacteria from the sea water, and lateral transfer of symbionts between hosts permits faster transfer of beneficial mutations within a host species than are possible with mutations within the host genome.\n\nAnother traditional distinction between endosymbionts has been between primary and secondary symbionts. Primary endosymbionts reside in specialized host cells that may be organized into larger, organ-like structures (in insects, the bacteriome). Associations between hosts and primary endosymbionts are usually ancient, with an estimated age of tens to hundreds of millions of years. According to endosymbiotic theory, extreme cases of primary endosymbionts include mitochondria, plastids (including chloroplasts), and possibly other organelles of eukaryotic cells. Primary endosymbionts are usually transmitted exclusively vertically, and the relationship is always mutualistic and generally obligate for both partners. Primary endosymbiosis is surprisingly common. An estimated 15% of insect species, for example, harbor this type of endosymbiont. In contrast, secondary endosymbiosis is often facultative, at least from the host point of view, and the associations are less ancient. Secondary endosymbionts do not reside in specialized host tissues, but may dwell in the body cavity dispersed in fat, muscle, or nervous tissue, or may grow within the gut. Transmission may be via vertical, horizontal, or both vertical and horizontal transfer. The relationship between host and secondary endosymbiont is not necessarily beneficial to the host; indeed, the relationship may be parasitic.\n\nThe distinction between vertical and horizontal transfer, and between primary and secondary endosymbiosis is not absolute, but follows a continuum, and may be subject to environmental influences. For example, in the stink bug \"Nezara viridula\", the vertical transmission rate of symbionts, which females provide to offspring by smearing the eggs with gastric caeca, was 100% at 20 °C, but decreased to 8% at 30 °C. Likewise, in aphids, the vertical transmission of bacteriocytes containing the primary endosymbiont \"Buchnera\" is drastically reduced at high temperature. In like manner, the distinction between commensal, mutualistic, and parasitic relationships is also not absolute. An example is the relationship between legumes and rhizobial species: N uptake is energetically more costly than the uptake of fixed nitrogen from the soil, so soil N is preferred if not limiting. During the early stages of nodule formation, the plant-rhizobial relationship actually resembles a pathogenesis more than it does a mutualistic association.\n\nLamarckism, the concept that an organism can pass on characteristics that it acquired during its lifetime to its offspring (also known as inheritance of acquired characteristics or soft inheritance) incorporated two common ideas of its time:\n\nAlthough Lamarckian theory was rejected by the neo-Darwinism of the modern evolutionary synthesis in which evolution occurs through random variations being subject to natural selection, the hologenome theory has aspects that harken back to Lamarckian concepts. In addition to the traditionally recognized modes of variation (\"i.e.\" sexual recombination, chromosomal rearrangement, mutation), the holobiont allows for two additional mechanisms of variation that are specific to the hologenome theory: (1) changes in the relative population of existing microorganisms (\"i.e.\" amplification and reduction) and (2) acquisition of novel strains from the environment, which may be passed on to offspring.\n\nChanges in the relative population of existing microorganisms corresponds to Lamarckian \"use and disuse\", while the ability to acquire novel strains from the environment, which may be passed on to offspring, corresponds to Lamarckian \"inheritance of acquired traits\". The hologenome theory, therefore, is said by its proponents to incorporate Lamarckian aspects within a Darwinian framework.\n\nThe pea aphid \"Acyrthosiphon pisum\" maintains an obligate symbiotic relationship with the bacterium \"Buchnera aphidicola\", which is transmitted maternally to the embryos that develop within the mother's ovarioles. Pea aphids live on sap, which is rich in sugars but deficient in amino acids. They rely on their \"Buchnera\" endosymbiotic population for essential amino acids, supplying in exchange nutrients as well as a protected intracellular environment that allows \"Buchnera\" to grow and reproduce. The relationship is actually more complicated than mutual nutrition; some strains of \"Buchnera\" increases host thermotolerance, while other strains do not. Both strains are present in field populations, suggesting that under some conditions, increased heat tolerance is advantageous to the host, while under other conditions, decreased heat tolerance but increased cold tolerance may be advantageous. One can consider the variant \"Buchnera\" genomes as alleles for the larger hologenome. The association between \"Buchnera\" and aphids began about 200 million years ago, with host and symbiont co-evolving since that time; in particular, it has been discovered that genome size in various \"Buchnera\" species has become extremely reduced, in some cases down to 450 kb, which is far smaller even than the 580 kb genome of \"Mycoplasma genitalium\".\n\nDevelopment of mating preferences, \"i.e.\" sexual selection, is considered to be an early event in speciation. In 1989, Dodd reported mating preferences in \"Drosophila\" that were induced by diet. It has recently been demonstrated that when otherwise identical populations of \"Drosophila\" were switched in diet between molasses medium and starch medium, that the \"molasses flies\" preferred to mate with other molasses flies, while the \"starch flies\" preferred to mate with other starch flies. This mating preference appeared after only one generation and was maintained for at least 37 generations. The origin of these differences were changes in the flies' populations of a particular bacterial symbiont, \"Lactobacillus plantarum\". Antibiotic treatment abolished the induced mating preferences. It appears that the symbiotic bacteria changed the levels of cuticular hydrocarbon sex pheromones.\n\nZilber-Rosenberg and Rosenberg (2008) have tabulated many of the ways in which symbionts are transmitted and their contributions to the fitness of the holobiont, beginning with mitochondria found in all eukaryotes, chloroplast in plants, and then various associations described in specific systems. The microbial contributions to host fitness included provision of specific amino acids, growth at high temperatures, provision of nutritional needs from cellulose, nitrogen metabolism, recognition signals, more efficient food utilization, protection of eggs and embryos against metabolism, camouflage against predators, photosynthesis, breakdown of complex polymers, stimulation of the immune system, angiogenesis, vitamin synthesis, fiber breakdown, fat storage, supply of minerals from the soil, supply of organics, acceleration of mineralization, carbon cycling, and salt tolerance.\n\nThe hologenome theory is debated. A major criticism by Ainsworth \"et al.\" has been their claim that \"V. shiloi\" was misidentified as the causative agent of coral bleaching, and that its presence in bleached \"O. patagonica\" was simply that of opportunistic colonization.\n\nIf this is true, the original observation that led to Rosenberg's later articulation of the theory would be invalid. On the other hand, Ainsworth \"et al.\" performed their samplings in 2005, two years after the Rosenberg group discovered \"O. patagonica\" no longer to be susceptible to \"V. shiloi\" infection; therefore their finding that bacteria are not the primary cause of present-day bleaching in Mediterranean coral \"O. patagonica\" should not be considered surprising. The rigorous satisfaction of Koch's postulates, as employed in Kushmaro \"et al.\" (1997), is generally accepted as providing a definitive identification of infectious disease agents.\n\nBaird \"et al.\" (2009) have questioned basic assumptions made by Reshef \"et al.\" (2006) in presuming that (1) coral generation times are too slow to adjust to novel stresses over the observed time scales, and that (2) the scale of dispersal of coral larvae is too large to allow for adaptation to local environments. They may simply have underestimated the potential rapidity of conventional means of natural selection. In cases of severe stress, multiple cases have been documented of ecologically significant evolutionary change occurring over a handful of generations. Novel adaptive mechanisms such as switching symbionts might not be necessary for corals to adjust to rapid climate change or novel stressors.\nOrganisms in symbiotic relationships evolve to accommodate each other, and the symbiotic relationship increases the overall fitness of the participant species. Although the hologenome theory is still being debated, it has gained a significant degree of popularity within the scientific community as a way of explaining rapid adaptive changes that are difficult to accommodate within a traditional Darwinian framework.\n\nDefinitions and uses of the words holobiont and hologenome also differ between proponents and skeptics, and the misuse of the terms has led to confusions over what comprises evidence related to the hologenome. Ongoing discourse is attempting to clear this confusion. Theis et al. clarify that \"critiquing the hologenome concept is not synonymous with critiquing coevolution, and arguing that an entity is not a primary unit of selection dismisses the fact that the hologenome concept has always embraced multilevel selection.\"\n\nFor instance, Chandler and Turelli (2014) criticize the conclusions of Brucker and Bordenstein (2013), noting that their observations are also consistent with an alternative explanation. Brucker and Bordenstein (2014) responded to these criticisms, claiming they were unfounded because of factual inaccuracies and altered arguments and definitions that were not advanced by Brucker and Bordenstein (2013).\n\nRecently, Forest L Rohwer and colleagues developed a novel statistical test to examine the potential for the hologenome theory of evolution in coral species. They found that coral species do not inherit microbial communities, and are instead colonized by a core group of microbes that associate with a diversity of species. The authors conclude: \"Identification of these two symbiont communities supports the holobiont model and calls into question the hologenome theory of evolution.\" However, other studies in coral adhere to the original and pluralistic definitions of holobionts and hologenomes. David Bourne, Kathleen Morrow and Nicole Webster clarify that \"The combined genomes of this coral holobiont form a coral hologenome, and genomic interactions within the hologenome ultimately define the coral phenotype.\"\n", "id": "34920670", "title": "Hologenome theory of evolution"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38503554", "text": "Robosquirrel\n\nRobosquirrel refers to several versions of robotic squirrels developed by researchers at the University of California, Davis and San Diego State University. Robosquirrel is currently in use and development in an interdisciplinary research project that uses biorobotics to investigate how communication between prey (e.g., squirrels) and predators (e.g., rattlesnakes) evolve in response to each other. It has received extensive science and popular media coverage. \nIt stirred controversy when Senator Tom Coburn listed it in his \"Wastebook 2012\" as a scientific research project that wastes United States federal tax dollars. \nSenator Coburn's release of \"Wastebook 2012\" was quickly picked up by the popular media and the robosquirrel project was the headline of many media stories.\n\nThe robosquirrel research project, in which robosquirrel is used and developed, has four aims: (1) to establish collaborations between ecologists and engineers to develop next generation robotic technology for studying predator-prey communication behavior, (2) to increase minority participation in science, (3) to develop public outreach, and (4) to support undergraduate and graduate education in biology and engineering. Currently, three versions of robosquirrel have been developed. \nIt is currently funded by the National Science Foundation (NSF) \nbased on peer review and by meeting criteria of intellectual merit and broader impacts required by NSF.\n\nThe controversy focuses on the amount of money spent ($325,000) on robosquirrel. The researchers have responded that robosquirrel only cost a few hundred dollars \nand that approximately 70% of the funds are currently spent on training future biologists and engineers.\n\nDonald Owings observed an interesting phenomenon during research in the field: when a California ground squirrel comes across a rattlesnake, it often raises its tail and waves it from side to side.\n\nIn 2007, Owings (Department of Psychology and his graduate student at the time, Aaron Rundus, began collaborating with Sanjay Joshi (Department of Mechanical/Aeronautical Engineering) at University of California, Davis. They used an infrared camera to videotape how snakes and squirrels behaviorally interact. They found that a squirrel shunts blood to its tail and thereby heats it up when encountering a rattlesnake but not for non-poisonous snakes.\n\nRattlesnakes were known to use infrared radiation to detect prey, but what they discovered suggests that the squirrels evolved the ability to communicate with rattlesnakes by heating up their tails and thereby signalling with infrared radiation.\n\nTo test this hypothesis, they built a robotic squirrel (robosquirrel) that could behaviorally respond to rattlesnakes when they moved. They found that when robosquirrel waved a heated tail in response to the movement of a rattlesnake, the snake became defensive (i.e., it moved away from the robotic squirrel) rather than predatory. If robosquirrel waved an unheated tail, then the rattlesnake continued its predatory behavior.\n\nThe next step was to determine whether squirrel behavior when rattlesnakes had not been encountered reduced the predatory behavior of rattlesnakes waiting in ambush. They video-recorded predatory behavior of rattlesnakes when ground squirrels flagged their tails. The researchers found that tail-flagging decreased the likelihood that rattlesnakes would strike and increased the likelihood that they would move away from that area.\n\nThey found that California ground squirrels are actually performing two types of tail flagging: \"vigilance advertising\" and \"perception advertising\". Vigilance advertising is hypothesized to occur when a squirrel enters an area that may contain rattlesnakes. By tail flagging, a squirrel may be signaling to a snake that it is vigilant and prepared to dodge any attacks. Perception advertising is hypothesized to occur when a squirrel encounters a rattlesnake and its tail flagging functions to signal to the snake that it is prepared to respond to attack and to warn other squirrels of the presence of rattlesnakes.\n\nTo test these hypotheses about the function of tail flagging, they built robosquirrel to record encounters with rattlesnakes. Robosquirrel was programmed to wag its tail in the presence of a snake and its tail temperature can increase above its body temperature when it encounters snakes. The robosquirrel behaviors presented to rattlesnakes in naturalistic contexts can be precisely controlled. This control of behavior is impossible with living squirrels and so robosquirrel allows researchers to investigate how rattlesnakes respond to specific behaviors.\n\nThe first robosquirrel was built using a taxidermically mounted adult female California ground squirrel. The tail was moved by a servo, which allowed robosquirrel to flag it tail at specified intervals. MATLAB software via a mini synchronous serial channel microcontroller, controlled the tail-flagging of robosquirrel.\n\nTo control the temperature of the interior of robosquirrel’s body, a coiled Nichrome 80 resistance wire was inserted and a cartridge heater was inserted into its tail. The temperature of the Nichrome wire and the cartridge heater were controlled by thermostats wired with thermocouples that were placed inside its body and tail. Power to the two heaters was regulated via the thermostats by using a proportional-integral differential (PID) control loop to regulate the duty cycle of the power relays.\n\nAn overhead camera videotaped the arena in which robosquirrel was mounted on a wooden stage beneath which were the theromostats and heater relays. A Rattlesnake was marked by attaching a small red light-emitting diode (LED) it. When a snake entered the arena, the images from the arena were analyzed by a program written in MATLAB that determined the distance between the squirrel and the LED. The program then calculated the rate of tail flagging based on the distance between the LED and robosquirrel. As the distance between the squirrel and LED on the rattlesnake decreased, robosquirrel increased its rate of tail flagging. The rates of tail flagging were based on previous field observations.\n\nThe first version of the field robosquirrel was a modification of the laboratory robosquirrel. The heating system of laboratory robosquirrel was repackaged in a toolbox for easy transportation and a Duracell Power-pack inverter provided power for the heaters and thermostats. Instead of using a desktop computer to process images and control tail flagging, an 8-b radio controller allowed a remote control to be used instead.\n\nTesting of robosquirrel was conducted at the Santa Margarita Ecological Reserve (SMER) near Fallbrook, California, operated by San Diego State University. Six red diamond rattlesnakes (\"Crotalus ruber\") were radio tagged for the study. For test trials, one observer positioned robosquirrel and controlled its tail flagging, while another observer monitored the rattlesnake’s response to robosquirrel.\n\nThe researchers, however, ran into problems. First, the outdoor robosquirrel was heavy and difficult to transport, requiring two or three people to carry it. Robosquirrel had to be moved across rough terrain and, at the same time, the researchers had to watch out for venomous snakes, tarantulas, and mountain lions. Second, rattlesnakes located themselves in a variety of ambush sites. Each site presented different challenges in setting up robosquirrel. The researchers concluded that they had to redesign robosquirrel to be less complicated to set up for each new habitat.\n\nTo redesign a more field-usable robosquirrel, custom electronics were developed to reduce bulk and weight. In addition to previous features, new features were added such as onboard cameras and data logging. To reduce weight, all power sources were placed in a small box underneath robosquirrel.\n\nThe new robosquirrel design used an ATmega128 microprocessor with 4 kB of data memory and 128 kB of program memory. The microprocessor was mounted on a custom designed, two-layer printed circuit board with a DB9 serial port for RS-232 communication and an SD card slot for data storage. The circuit board also had a Joint Test Action Group port for programming and radio control hardware. The main program ran in a loop that repeatedly checked for input from the remote control.\n\nNichrome heating elements were controlled by pulse-width modulation (PWM) of transistors. Tail flagging was controlled by a 16-b counter in fast-PWM compare-match mode connected to the same Hitec servo. For this version of robosquirrel, the tail servo was mounted inside robosquirrel, allowing more realistic tail-flagging. A premade receiver–transmitter kit Radio allowed user control of robosquirrel. A camera allowed for positioning of robosquirrel relative to a rattlesnake and for monitoring of a snake.\n\nRobosquirrel was deployed at Camp Ohlone in the Sunol Regional Park in Sunol, California. This site was selected because it has large populations of ground squirrels and rattlesnakes. Seventeen snakes were captured and radio tagged so that they could be tracked. Initial results with the new robosquirrel indicated that rattlesnakes abandon their ambush sites more quickly when robosquirrel tail-flagged than when it did not as predicted.\n\nIn 2008, Senator Tom Coburn began releasing reports of what he considers wasteful federal spending. The first report was released on December 11, 2008. On December 12, 2010, Senator Coburn released the first report entitled \"Wastebook 2010: A Guide to Some of the Most Wasteful Government Spending of 2010.” On October 16, 2012, \"Wastebook 2012\" was released listing 100 instances in which over spending is claimed (note the table of contents only lists 10). The Robosquirrel project is seventh on the list.\n\nSenator Coburn's \"Wastebook\" series has been lauded as important tool for detecting wasteful federal spending and as guide for how to cut the U.S. deficit. Critics have argued that the projects listed in the \"Wastebook\" series were not reviewed by experts before inclusion, that there are many mistakes in \"Wastebook\", and that the \"Wastebook\" series is especially critical of scientific research.\n\nSenator Tom Colburn's \"Wastebook 2012\" listed robosquirrel as an example of wasteful government spending:\n\nIn this corner with a triangular-shaped head, a rattle on its tail, with a venomous bite is the rattlesnake.\n\nAnd in the other corner, whistling and chirping, covered in fur with a bushy tail, is the squirrel.\n\nThese two critters are long-time adversaries. Squirrels are frequently preyed upon by the rattlesnakes, but the snakes rarely attack squirrels who are wagging their tales. When they do, they usually miss the fast moving squirrel.\n\nBut what happens when a snake is confronted by a robot squirrel, built to look, act, and even smell like the real thing?\n\nResearchers at San Diego State University and the University of California (Davis) spent a portion of a $325,000 National Science Foundation (NSF) grant to construct a robotic squirrel named “RoboSquirrel” to answer that question….\n\nDuring these difficult fiscal times of massive deficits, paying $325,000 for a robot squirrel seems a bit squirrelly. (pp. 20–21)\n\nThe robosquirrel project was one of 10 projects listed in his October 15, 2012 press release, but it was singled out by many major news outlets as illustrated by the titles of news articles (e.g., \"Robo-squirrel, video game on government pork list\" in USA Today).\n\nThe main response to Senator Coburn's criticism that \"During these difficult fiscal times of massive deficits, paying $325,000 for a robot squirrel seems a bit squirrelly\" is that the robosquirrel (i.e., second field version) in question cost only a few hundred dollars. Most of the funding has gone toward the education of future scientists and engineers. The science and engineering in the project furthers the advancement of biorobotics and the study of animal behavior and its evolution by building on previous research using biorobotics in animal behavior research.\n\nOn July 1, 2010 (the estimated end date is June 30, 2014), the National Science Foundation began funding a research proposal by Rulon Clark (San Diego State University) and Sanjay Joshi (University of California, Davis) entitled \"Understanding predator-prey signaling interactions: the dynamics of antisnake displays in ground squirrels and kangaroo rats.\" They proposed to investigate the function and evolution of animal communication between predators and prey using robots that can interact with predators. They also stated in their proposal that their research project would support and provide training for future scientists and engineers.\n\nThe researchers reported that they were awarded $390,000 for a 4-year study in 2010 by NSF. Their universities take about one third of the funds in indirect costs, which go for overhead, for example, to building maintenance, energy costs, and scholarships for students. This leaves approximately $260,000 over four years for the research project itself. Most of these funds go towards supporting biology and engineering students who help conduct the proposed research. They estimate that of the direct and indirect budget categories in their NSF grant, nearly $273,000 or 70% of the total funds go to training and support for students. They report that 34 students have received training so far in this research project. They also report that of the funds awarded by NSF, $13,700 has or will be spent on biorobotics over the four years of this study, which is 3.5% of the total funds.\n\n\n", "id": "38503554", "title": "Robosquirrel"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15357916", "text": "The Phenomenon of Man\n\nThe Phenomenon of Man (\"Le phénomène humain\") is a 1955 book written by the French philosopher, paleontologist and Jesuit priest Pierre Teilhard de Chardin. In this work, Teilhard describes evolution as a process that leads to increasing complexity, culminating in the unification of consciousness.\n\nThe book was finished in the 1930s, but was published posthumously in 1955, and translated into English in 1959. The Roman Catholic Church initially prohibited the publication of some of Teilhard's writings on the grounds that they contradicted orthodoxy.\n\nThe foreword to the book was written by one of the key advocates for natural selection and evolution of the 20th century, and a co-developer of the modern synthesis in biology, Julian Huxley.\n\nTeilhard views evolution as a process that leads to increasing complexity. From the cell to the thinking animal, a process of psychical concentration leads to greater consciousness. The emergence of \"Homo sapiens\" marks the beginning of a new age, as the power acquired by consciousness to turn in upon itself raises humankind to a new sphere. Borrowing Huxley’s expression, Teilhard describes humankind as evolution becoming conscious of itself.\nIn Teilhard's conception of the evolution of the species, a collective identity begins to develop as trade and the transmission of ideas increases. Knowledge accumulates and is transmitted in increasing levels of depth and complexity. This leads to a further augmentation of consciousness and the emergence of a thinking layer that envelops the earth. Teilhard calls the new membrane the “noosphere” (from the Greek “\"nous\"”, meaning mind), a term first coined by Vladimir Vernadsky. The noosphere is the collective consciousness of humanity, the networks of thought and emotion in which all are immersed. \nThe development of science and technology causes an expansion of the human sphere of influence, allowing a person to be simultaneously present in every corner of the world. Teilhard argues that humanity has thus become cosmopolitan, stretching a single organized membrane over the Earth. Teilhard describes the process by which this happens as a \"gigantic psychobiological operation, a sort of mega-synthesis, the “super-arrangement” to which all the thinking elements of the earth find themselves today individually and collectively subject\". The rapid expansion of the noosphere requires a new domain of psychical expansion, which \"is staring us in the face if we would only raise our heads to look at it\".\n\nIn Teilhard’s view, evolution will culminate in the Omega Point, a sort of supreme consciousness. Layers of consciousness will converge in Omega, fusing and consuming them in itself. The concentration of a conscious universe will reassemble in itself all consciousnesses as well as all that we are conscious of. Teilhard emphasizes that each individual facet of consciousness will remain conscious of itself at the end of the process.\n\nIn 1961, the Nobel Prize-winner Peter Medawar, a British immunologist, wrote a scornful review of the book for the journal \"Mind\", calling it \"a bag of tricks\" and saying that the author had shown \"an active willingness to be deceived\": \"the greater part of it, I shall show, is nonsense, tricked out with a variety of metaphysical conceits, and its author can be excused of dishonesty only on the grounds that before deceiving others he has taken great pains to deceive himself\".\n\nThe evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins called Medawar's review \"devastating\", and \"The Phenomenon of Man\" \"the quintessence of bad poetic science\".\n\nIn the June 1995 issue of \"Wired\", Jennifer Cobb Kreisberg said, \"Teilhard saw the Net coming more than half a century before it arrived\":\nTeilhard imagined a stage of evolution characterized by a complex membrane of information enveloping the globe and fueled by human consciousness. It sounds a little off-the-wall, until you think about the Net, that vast electronic web encircling the Earth, running point to point through a nerve-like constellation of wires.\n\nIn July 2009, during a vespers service in Aosta Cathedral in northern Italy, Pope Benedict XVI, reflecting on the Epistle to the Romans in which \"St. Paul writes that the world itself will one day become a form of living worship\", commented on Teilhard:\nIt's the great vision that later Teilhard de Chardin also had: At the end we will have a true cosmic liturgy, where the cosmos becomes a living host. Let's pray to the Lord that he help us be priests in this sense, to help in the transformation of the world in adoration of God, beginning with ourselves.\n", "id": "15357916", "title": "The Phenomenon of Man"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19852895", "text": "Introduction to evolution\n\nEvolution is the process of change in all forms of life over generations, and evolutionary biology is the study of how evolution occurs. Biological populations evolve through genetic changes that correspond to changes in the organisms' observable traits. Genetic changes include mutations, which are caused by damage or replication errors in organisms' DNA. As the genetic variation of a population drifts randomly over generations, natural selection gradually leads traits to become more or less common based on the relative reproductive success of organisms with those traits.\n\nThe age of the Earth is about 4.54 billion years. The earliest undisputed evidence of life on Earth dates at least from 3.5 billion years ago, during the Eoarchean Era after geological crust started to solidify, following the earlier molten Hadean Eon. Microbial mat fossils in 3.48 billion-year-old sandstone have been found in Western Australia. Other early physical evidence of life includes graphite, a biogenic substance, in 3.7 billion-year-old metasedimentary rocks in western Greenland and, in 2015, \"remains of biotic life\" found in 4.1 billion-year-old rocks in Western Australia. According to one of the researchers, \"If life arose relatively quickly on Earth ... then it could be common in the universe.\" It is estimated that more than 99 percent of all species, amounting to over five billion species, that ever lived on Earth are extinct. Estimates on the number of Earth's current species range from 10 million to 14 million, of which about 1.2 million have been documented and over 86 percent have not yet been described. More recently, in May 2016, scientists reported that 1 trillion species are estimated to be on Earth currently with only one-thousandth of one percent described.\n\nEvolution does not attempt to explain the origin of life (covered instead by abiogenesis), but it does explain how early lifeforms evolved into the complex ecosystem that we see today. Based on the similarities between all present-day organisms, all life on Earth is assumed to have originated through common descent from a last universal ancestor from which all known species have diverged through the process of evolution. All individuals have hereditary material in the form of genes received from their parents, which they pass on to any offspring. Among offspring there are variations of genes due to the introduction of new genes via random changes called mutations or via reshuffling of existing genes during sexual reproduction. The offspring differs from the parent in minor random ways. If those differences are helpful, the offspring is more likely to survive and reproduce. This means that more offspring in the next generation will have that helpful difference and individuals will not have equal chances of reproductive success. In this way, traits that result in organisms being better adapted to their living conditions become more common in descendant populations. These differences accumulate resulting in changes within the population. This process is responsible for the many diverse life forms in the world.\n\nThe forces of evolution are most evident when populations become isolated, either through geographic distance or by other mechanisms that prevent genetic exchange. Over time, isolated populations can branch off into new species.\n\nThe majority of genetic mutations neither assist, change the appearance of, nor bring harm to individuals. Through the process of genetic drift, these mutated genes are neutrally sorted among populations and survive across generations by chance alone. In contrast to genetic drift, natural selection is not a random process because it acts on traits that are necessary for survival and reproduction. Natural selection and random genetic drift are constant and dynamic parts of life and over time this has shaped the branching structure in the tree of life.\n\nThe modern understanding of evolution began with the 1859 publication of Charles Darwin's \"On the Origin of Species\". In addition, Gregor Mendel's work with plants helped to explain the hereditary patterns of genetics. Fossil discoveries in paleontology, advances in population genetics and a global network of scientific research have provided further details into the mechanisms of evolution. Scientists now have a good understanding of the origin of new species (speciation) and have observed the speciation process in the laboratory and in the wild. Evolution is the principal scientific theory that biologists use to understand life and is used in many disciplines, including medicine, psychology, conservation biology, anthropology, forensics, agriculture and other social-cultural applications.\n\nThe main ideas of evolution may be summarized as follows:\n\n\nIn the 19th century, natural history collections and museums were popular. The European expansion and naval expeditions employed naturalists, while curators of grand museums showcased preserved and live specimens of the varieties of life. Charles Darwin was an English graduate educated and trained in the disciplines of natural history. Such natural historians would collect, catalogue, describe and study the vast collections of specimens stored and managed by curators at these museums. Darwin served as a ship's naturalist on board HMS \"Beagle\", assigned to a five-year research expedition around the world. During his voyage, he observed and collected an abundance of organisms, being very interested in the diverse forms of life along the coasts of South America and the neighboring Galápagos Islands.\n\nDarwin gained extensive experience as he collected and studied the natural history of life forms from distant places. Through his studies, he formulated the idea that each species had developed from ancestors with similar features. In 1838, he described how a process he called natural selection would make this happen.\n\nThe size of a population depends on how much and how many resources are able to support it. For the population to remain the same size year after year, there must be an equilibrium, or balance between the population size and available resources. Since organisms produce more offspring than their environment can support, not all individuals can survive out of each generation. There must be a competitive struggle for resources that aid in survival. As a result, Darwin realised that it was not chance alone that determined survival. Instead, survival of an organism depends on the differences of each individual organism, or \"traits,\" that aid or hinder survival and reproduction. Well-adapted individuals are likely to leave more offspring than their less well-adapted competitors. Traits that hinder survival and reproduction would \"disappear\" over generations. Traits that help an organism survive and reproduce would \"accumulate\" over generations. Darwin realised that the unequal ability of individuals to survive and reproduce could cause gradual changes in the population and used the term \"natural selection\" to describe this process.\n\nObservations of variations in animals and plants formed the basis of the theory of natural selection. For example, Darwin observed that orchids and insects have a close relationship that allows the pollination of the plants. He noted that orchids have a variety of structures that attract insects, so that pollen from the flowers gets stuck to the insects' bodies. In this way, insects transport the pollen from a male to a female orchid. In spite of the elaborate appearance of orchids, these specialised parts are made from the same basic structures that make up other flowers. In his book, \"Fertilisation of Orchids\" (1862), Darwin proposed that the orchid flowers were adapted from pre-existing parts, through natural selection.\n\nDarwin was still researching and experimenting with his ideas on natural selection when he received a letter from Alfred Russel Wallace describing a theory very similar to his own. This led to an immediate joint publication of both theories. Both Wallace and Darwin saw the history of life like a family tree, with each fork in the tree’s limbs being a common ancestor. The tips of the limbs represented modern species and the branches represented the common ancestors that are shared amongst many different species. To explain these relationships, Darwin said that all living things were related, and this meant that all life must be descended from a few forms, or even from a single common ancestor. He called this process \"descent with modification\".\n\nDarwin published his theory of evolution by natural selection in \"On the Origin of Species\" in 1859. His theory means that all life, including humanity, is a product of continuing natural processes. The implication that all life on Earth has a common ancestor has met with objections from some religious groups. Their objections are in contrast to the level of support for the theory by more than 99 percent of those within the scientific community today.\n\nNatural selection is commonly equated with \"survival of the fittest\", but this expression originated in Herbert Spencer's \"Principles of Biology\" in 1864, five years after Charles Darwin published his original works. \"Survival of the fittest\" describes the process of natural selection incorrectly, because natural selection is not only about survival and it is not always the fittest that survives.\n\nDarwins theory of natural selection laid the groundwork for modern evolutionary theory, and his experiments and observations showed that the organisms in populations varied from each other, that some of these variations were inherited, and that these differences could be acted on by natural selection. However, he could not explain the source of these variations. Like many of his predecessors, Darwin mistakenly thought that heritable traits were a product of use and disuse, and that features acquired during an organism's lifetime could be passed on to its offspring. He looked for examples, such as large ground feeding birds getting stronger legs through exercise, and weaker wings from not flying until, like the ostrich, they could not fly at all. This misunderstanding was called the inheritance of acquired characters and was part of the theory of transmutation of species put forward in 1809 by Jean-Baptiste Lamarck. In the late 19th century this theory became known as Lamarckism. Darwin produced an unsuccessful theory he called pangenesis to try to explain how acquired characteristics could be inherited. In the 1880s August Weismann's experiments indicated that changes from use and disuse could not be inherited, and Lamarckism gradually fell from favor.\n\nThe missing information needed to help explain how new features could pass from a parent to its offspring was provided by the pioneering genetics work of Gregor Mendel. Mendel's experiments with several generations of pea plants demonstrated that inheritance works by separating and reshuffling hereditary information during the formation of sex cells and recombining that information during fertilisation. This is like mixing different hands of playing cards, with an organism getting a random mix of half of the cards from one parent, and half of the cards from the other. Mendel called the information \"factors\"; however, they later became known as genes. Genes are the basic units of heredity in living organisms. They contain the information that directs the physical development and behavior of organisms.\n\nGenes are made of DNA. DNA is a long molecule made up of individual molecules called nucleotides. Genetic information is encoded in the sequence of nucleotides, that make up the DNA, just as the sequence of the letters in words carries information on a page. The genes are like short instructions built up of the \"letters\" of the DNA alphabet. Put together, the entire set of these genes gives enough information to serve as an \"instruction manual\" of how to build and run an organism. The instructions spelled out by this DNA alphabet can be changed, however, by mutations, and this may alter the instructions carried within the genes. Within the cell, the genes are carried in chromosomes, which are packages for carrying the DNA. It is the reshuffling of the chromosomes that results in unique combinations of genes in offspring. Since genes interact with one another during the development of an organism, novel combinations of genes produced by sexual reproduction can increase the genetic variability of the population even without new mutations. The genetic variability of a population can also increase when members of that population interbreed with individuals from a different population causing gene flow between the populations. This can introduce genes into a population that were not present before.\n\nEvolution is not a random process. Although mutations in DNA are random, natural selection is not a process of chance: the environment determines the probability of reproductive success. Evolution is an inevitable result of imperfectly copying, self-replicating organisms reproducing over billions of years under the selective pressure of the environment. The outcome of evolution is not a perfectly designed organism. The end products of natural selection are organisms that are adapted to their present environments. Natural selection does not involve progress towards an ultimate goal. Evolution does not strive for more advanced, more intelligent, or more sophisticated life forms. For example, fleas (wingless parasites) are descended from a winged, ancestral scorpionfly, and snakes are lizards that no longer require limbs—although pythons still grow tiny structures that are the remains of their ancestor's hind legs. Organisms are merely the outcome of variations that succeed or fail, dependent upon the environmental conditions at the time.\n\nRapid environmental changes typically cause extinctions. Of all species that have existed on Earth, 99.9 percent are now extinct. Since life began on Earth, five major mass extinctions have led to large and sudden drops in the variety of species. The most recent, the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event, occurred 66 million years ago.\n\nGenetic drift is a cause of allelic frequency change within populations of a species. Alleles are different variations of specific genes. They determine things like hair color, skin tone, eye color and blood type; in other words, all the genetic traits that vary between individuals. Genetic drift does not introduce new alleles to a population, but it can reduce variation within a population by removing an allele from the gene pool. Genetic drift is caused by random sampling of alleles. A truly random sample is a sample in which no outside forces affect what is selected. It is like pulling marbles of the same size and weight but of different colors from a brown paper bag. In any offspring, the alleles present are samples of the previous generations alleles, and chance plays a role in whether an individual survives to reproduce and to pass a sample of their generation onward to the next. The allelic frequency of a population is the ratio of the copies of one specific allele that share the same form compared to the number of all forms of the allele present in the population.\n\nGenetic drift affects smaller populations more than it affects larger populations.\n\nThe Hardy–Weinberg principle states that a large population in Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium will have no change in the frequency of alleles as generations pass. It is impossible for a population of any considerable size to reach this equilibrium because of the five requirements that must be met. A population must be infinite in size. There must be a zero percent mutation rate between generations, because mutations can alter existing alleles or create new ones. There can be no immigration or emigration in the population, because individuals arriving and leaving directly change allelic frequencies. There can be no selective pressures of any kind on the population, meaning that no individual is more likely than any other to survive and reproduce. Finally, mating must be totally random, with all males (or females in some cases) being equally desirable mates. This ensures a true random mixing of alleles.\n\nA population that is in Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium is analogous to a deck of cards; no matter how many times the deck is shuffled, no new cards are added and no old ones are taken away. Cards in the deck represent alleles in a population’s gene pool.\n\nA population bottleneck occurs when the population of a species is reduced drastically over a short period of time due to external forces. In a true population bottleneck, the reduction does not favor any combination of alleles; it is totally random chance which individuals survive. A bottleneck can reduce or eliminate genetic variation from a population. Further drift events after the bottleneck event can also reduce the population's genetic diversity. The lack of diversity created can make the population at risk to other selective pressures.\n\nA common example of a population bottleneck is the Northern elephant seal. Due to excessive hunting throughout the 19th century, the population of the northern elephant seal was reduced to 30 individuals or less. They have made a full recovery, with the total number of individuals at around 100,000 and growing. The effects of the bottleneck are visible, however. The seals are more likely to have serious problems with disease or genetic disorders, because there is almost no diversity in the population.\n\nThe founder effect occurs when a small group from one population splits off and forms a new population, often through geographic isolation. This new population's allelic frequency is probably different from the original population's, and will change how common certain alleles are in the populations. The founders of the population will determine the genetic makeup, and potentially the survival, of the new population for generations.\n\nOne example of the founder effect is found in the Amish migration to Pennsylvania in 1744. Two of the founders of the colony in Pennsylvania carried the recessive allele for Ellis–van Creveld syndrome. Because the Amish tend to be religious isolates, they interbreed, and through generations of this practice the frequency of Ellis–van Creveld syndrome in the Amish people is much higher than the frequency in the general population.\n\nThe modern evolutionary synthesis is based on the concept that populations of organisms have significant genetic variation caused by mutation and by the recombination of genes during sexual reproduction. It defines evolution as the change in allelic frequencies within a population caused by genetic drift, gene flow between sub populations, and natural selection. Natural selection is emphasised as the most important mechanism of evolution; large changes are the result of the gradual accumulation of small changes over long periods of time.\n\nThe modern evolutionary synthesis is the outcome of a merger of several different scientific fields to produce a more cohesive understanding of evolutionary theory. In the 1920s, Ronald Fisher, J.B.S. Haldane and Sewall Wright combined Darwin's theory of natural selection with statistical models of Mendelian genetics, founding the discipline of population genetics. In the 1930s and 1940s, efforts were made to merge population genetics, the observations of field naturalists on the distribution of species and sub species, and analysis of the fossil record into a unified explanatory model. The application of the principles of genetics to naturally occurring populations, by scientists such as Theodosius Dobzhansky and Ernst Mayr, advanced the understanding of the processes of evolution. Dobzhansky's 1937 work \"Genetics and the Origin of Species\" helped bridge the gap between genetics and field biology by presenting the mathematical work of the population geneticists in a form more useful to field biologists, and by showing that wild populations had much more genetic variability with geographically isolated subspecies and reservoirs of genetic diversity in recessive genes than the models of the early population geneticists had allowed for. Mayr, on the basis of an understanding of genes and direct observations of evolutionary processes from field research, introduced the biological species concept, which defined a species as a group of interbreeding or potentially interbreeding populations that are reproductively isolated from all other populations. Both Dobzhansky and Mayr emphasised the importance of subspecies reproductively isolated by geographical barriers in the emergence of new species. The paleontologist George Gaylord Simpson helped to incorporate paleontology with a statistical analysis of the fossil record that showed a pattern consistent with the branching and non-directional pathway of evolution of organisms predicted by the modern synthesis. \n\nScientific evidence for evolution comes from many aspects of biology and includes fossils, homologous structures, and molecular similarities between species' DNA.\n\nResearch in the field of paleontology, the study of fossils, supports the idea that all living organisms are related. Fossils provide evidence that accumulated changes in organisms over long periods of time have led to the diverse forms of life we see today. A fossil itself reveals the organism's structure and the relationships between present and extinct species, allowing paleontologists to construct a family tree for all of the life forms on Earth.\n\nModern paleontology began with the work of Georges Cuvier. Cuvier noted that, in sedimentary rock, each layer contained a specific group of fossils. The deeper layers, which he proposed to be older, contained simpler life forms. He noted that many forms of life from the past are no longer present today. One of Cuvier’s successful contributions to the understanding of the fossil record was establishing extinction as a fact. In an attempt to explain extinction, Cuvier proposed the idea of \"revolutions\" or catastrophism in which he speculated that geological catastrophes had occurred throughout the Earth’s history, wiping out large numbers of species. Cuvier's theory of revolutions was later replaced by uniformitarian theories, notably those of James Hutton and Charles Lyell who proposed that the Earth’s geological changes were gradual and consistent. However, current evidence in the fossil record supports the concept of mass extinctions. As a result, the general idea of catastrophism has re-emerged as a valid hypothesis for at least some of the rapid changes in life forms that appear in the fossil records.\n\nA very large number of fossils have now been discovered and identified. These fossils serve as a chronological record of evolution. The fossil record provides examples of transitional species that demonstrate ancestral links between past and present life forms. One such transitional fossil is \"Archaeopteryx\", an ancient organism that had the distinct characteristics of a reptile (such as a long, bony tail and conical teeth) yet also had characteristics of birds (such as feathers and a wishbone). The implication from such a find is that modern reptiles and birds arose from a common ancestor.\n\nThe comparison of similarities between organisms of their form or appearance of parts, called their morphology, has long been a way to classify life into closely related groups. This can be done by comparing the structure of adult organisms in different species or by comparing the patterns of how cells grow, divide and even migrate during an organism's development.\n\nTaxonomy is the branch of biology that names and classifies all living things. Scientists use morphological and genetic similarities to assist them in categorising life forms based on ancestral relationships. For example, orangutans, gorillas, chimpanzees, and humans all belong to the same taxonomic grouping referred to as a family—in this case the family called Hominidae. These animals are grouped together because of similarities in morphology that come from common ancestry (called \"homology\").\nStrong evidence for evolution comes from the analysis of homologous structures: structures in different species that no longer perform the same task but which share a similar structure. Such is the case of the forelimbs of mammals. The forelimbs of a human, cat, whale, and bat all have strikingly similar bone structures. However, each of these four species' forelimbs performs a different task. The same bones that construct a bat's wings, which are used for flight, also construct a whale's flippers, which are used for swimming. Such a \"design\" makes little sense if they are unrelated and uniquely constructed for their particular tasks. The theory of evolution explains these homologous structures: all four animals shared a common ancestor, and each has undergone change over many generations. These changes in structure have produced forelimbs adapted for different tasks.\nHowever, anatomical comparisons can be misleading, as not all anatomical similarities indicate a close relationship. Organisms that share similar environments will often develop similar physical features, a process known as \"convergent evolution\". Both sharks and dolphins have similar body forms, yet are only distantly related—sharks are fish and dolphins are mammals. Such similarities are a result of both populations being exposed to the same selective pressures. Within both groups, changes that aid swimming have been favored. Thus, over time, they developed similar appearances (morphology), even though they are not closely related.\n\nIn some cases, anatomical comparison of structures in the embryos of two or more species provides evidence for a shared ancestor that may not be obvious in the adult forms. As the embryo develops, these homologies can be lost to view, and the structures can take on different functions. Part of the basis of classifying the vertebrate group (which includes humans), is the presence of a tail (extending beyond the anus) and pharyngeal slits. Both structures appear during some stage of embryonic development but are not always obvious in the adult form.\n\nBecause of the morphological similarities present in embryos of different species during development, it was once assumed that organisms re-enact their evolutionary history as an embryo. It was thought that human embryos passed through an amphibian then a reptilian stage before completing their development as mammals. Such a reenactment, often called \"recapitulation theory\", is not supported by scientific evidence. What does occur, however, is that the first stages of development are similar in broad groups of organisms. At very early stages, for instance, all vertebrates appear extremely similar, but do not exactly resemble any ancestral species. As development continues, specific features emerge from this basic pattern.\n\nHomology includes a unique group of shared structures referred to as \"vestigial structures\". \"Vestigial\" refers to anatomical parts that are of minimal, if any, value to the organism that possesses them. These apparently illogical structures are remnants of organs that played an important role in ancestral forms. Such is the case in whales, which have small vestigial bones that appear to be remnants of the leg bones of their ancestors which walked on land. Humans also have vestigial structures, including the ear muscles, the wisdom teeth, the appendix, the tail bone, body hair (including goose bumps), and the semilunar fold in the corner of the eye.\n\nBiogeography is the study of the geographical distribution of species. Evidence from biogeography, especially from the biogeography of oceanic islands, played a key role in convincing both Darwin and Alfred Russel Wallace that species evolved with a branching pattern of common descent. Islands often contain endemic species, species not found anywhere else, but those species are often related to species found on the nearest continent. Furthermore, islands often contain clusters of closely related species that have very different ecological niches, that is have different ways of making a living in the environment. Such clusters form through a process of adaptive radiation where a single ancestral species colonises an island that has a variety of open ecological niches and then diversifies by evolving into different species adapted to fill those empty niches. Well-studied examples include Darwin's finches, a group of 13 finch species endemic to the Galápagos Islands, and the Hawaiian honeycreepers, a group of birds that once, before extinctions caused by humans, numbered 60 species filling diverse ecological roles, all descended from a single finch like ancestor that arrived on the Hawaiian Islands some 4 million years ago. Another example is the Silversword alliance, a group of perennial plant species, also endemic to the Hawaiian Islands, that inhabit a variety of habitats and come in a variety of shapes and sizes that include trees, shrubs, and ground hugging mats, but which can be hybridised with one another and with certain tarweed species found on the west coast of North America; it appears that one of those tarweeds colonised Hawaii in the past, and gave rise to the entire Silversword alliance.\nEvery living organism (with the possible exception of RNA viruses) contains molecules of DNA, which carries genetic information. Genes are the pieces of DNA that carry this information, and they influence the properties of an organism. Genes determine an individual's general appearance and to some extent their behavior. If two organisms are closely related, their DNA will be very similar. On the other hand, the more distantly related two organisms are, the more differences they will have. For example, brothers are closely related and have very similar DNA, while cousins share a more distant relationship and have far more differences in their DNA. Similarities in DNA are used to determine the relationships between species in much the same manner as they are used to show relationships between individuals. For example, comparing chimpanzees with gorillas and humans shows that there is as much as a 96 percent similarity between the DNA of humans and chimps. Comparisons of DNA indicate that humans and chimpanzees are more closely related to each other than either species is to gorillas.\n\nThe field of molecular systematics focuses on measuring the similarities in these molecules and using this information to work out how different types of organisms are related through evolution. These comparisons have allowed biologists to build a \"relationship tree\" of the evolution of life on Earth. They have even allowed scientists to unravel the relationships between organisms whose common ancestors lived such a long time ago that no real similarities remain in the appearance of the organisms.\n\n\"Artificial selection\" is the controlled breeding of domestic plants and animals. Humans determine which animal or plant will reproduce and which of the offspring will survive; thus, they determine which genes will be passed on to future generations. The process of artificial selection has had a significant impact on the evolution of domestic animals. For example, people have produced different types of dogs by controlled breeding. The differences in size between the Chihuahua and the Great Dane are the result of artificial selection. Despite their dramatically different physical appearance, they and all other dogs evolved from a few wolves domesticated by humans in what is now China less than 15,000 years ago.\n\nArtificial selection has produced a wide variety of plants. In the case of maize (corn), recent genetic evidence suggests that domestication occurred 10,000 years ago in central Mexico. Prior to domestication, the edible portion of the wild form was small and difficult to collect. Today \"The Maize Genetics Cooperation • Stock Center\" maintains a collection of more than 10,000 genetic variations of maize that have arisen by random mutations and chromosomal variations from the original wild type.\n\nIn artificial selection the new breed or variety that emerges is the one with random mutations attractive to humans, while in natural selection the surviving species is the one with random mutations useful to it in its non-human environment. In both natural and artificial selection the variations are a result of random mutations, and the underlying genetic processes are essentially the same. Darwin carefully observed the outcomes of artificial selection in animals and plants to form many of his arguments in support of natural selection. Much of his book \"On the Origin of Species\" was based on these observations of the many varieties of domestic pigeons arising from artificial selection. Darwin proposed that if humans could achieve dramatic changes in domestic animals in short periods, then natural selection, given millions of years, could produce the differences seen in living things today.\n\nCoevolution is a process in which two or more species influence the evolution of each other. All organisms are influenced by life around them; however, in coevolution there is evidence that genetically determined traits in each species directly resulted from the interaction between the two organisms.\n\nAn extensively documented case of coevolution is the relationship between \"Pseudomyrmex\", a type of ant, and the \"acacia\", a plant that the ant uses for food and shelter. The relationship between the two is so intimate that it has led to the evolution of special structures and behaviors in both organisms. The ant defends the acacia against herbivores and clears the forest floor of the seeds from competing plants. In response, the plant has evolved swollen thorns that the ants use as shelter and special flower parts that the ants eat.\nSuch coevolution does not imply that the ants and the tree choose to behave in an altruistic manner. Rather, across a population small genetic changes in both ant and tree benefited each. The benefit gave a slightly higher chance of the characteristic being passed on to the next generation. Over time, successive mutations created the relationship we observe today.\n\nGiven the right circumstances, and enough time, evolution leads to the emergence of new species. Scientists have struggled to find a precise and all-inclusive definition of \"species\". Ernst Mayr defined a species as a population or group of populations whose members have the potential to interbreed naturally with one another to produce viable, fertile offspring. (The members of a species cannot produce viable, fertile offspring with members of \"other\" species). Mayr's definition has gained wide acceptance among biologists, but does not apply to organisms such as bacteria, which reproduce asexually.\n\nSpeciation is the lineage-splitting event that results in two separate species forming from a single common ancestral population. A widely accepted method of speciation is called \"allopatric speciation\". Allopatric speciation begins when a population becomes geographically separated. Geological processes, such as the emergence of mountain ranges, the formation of canyons, or the flooding of land bridges by changes in sea level may result in separate populations. For speciation to occur, separation must be substantial, so that genetic exchange between the two populations is completely disrupted. In their separate environments, the genetically isolated groups follow their own unique evolutionary pathways. Each group will accumulate different mutations as well as be subjected to different selective pressures. The accumulated genetic changes may result in separated populations that can no longer interbreed if they are reunited. Barriers that prevent interbreeding are either \"prezygotic\" (prevent mating or fertilisation) or \"postzygotic\" (barriers that occur after fertilisation). If interbreeding is no longer possible, then they will be considered different species. The result of four billion years of evolution is the diversity of life around us, with an estimated 1.75 million different species in existence today.\n\nUsually the process of speciation is slow, occurring over very long time spans; thus direct observations within human life-spans are rare. However speciation has been observed in present-day organisms, and past speciation events are recorded in fossils. Scientists have documented the formation of five new species of cichlid fishes from a single common ancestor that was isolated fewer than 5,000 years ago from the parent stock in Lake Nagubago. The evidence for speciation in this case was morphology (physical appearance) and lack of natural interbreeding. These fish have complex mating rituals and a variety of colorations; the slight modifications introduced in the new species have changed the mate selection process and the five forms that arose could not be convinced to interbreed.\n\nThe theory of evolution is widely accepted among the scientific community, serving to link the diverse specialty areas of biology. Evolution provides the field of biology with a solid scientific base. The significance of evolutionary theory is summarised by Theodosius Dobzhansky as \"nothing in biology makes sense except in the light of evolution.\" Nevertheless, the theory of evolution is not static. There is much discussion within the scientific community concerning the mechanisms behind the evolutionary process. For example, the rate at which evolution occurs is still under discussion. In addition, there are conflicting opinions as to which is the primary unit of evolutionary change—the organism or the gene.\n\nDarwin and his contemporaries viewed evolution as a slow and gradual process. Evolutionary trees are based on the idea that profound differences in species are the result of many small changes that accumulate over long periods.\n\nGradualism had its basis in the works of the geologists James Hutton and Charles Lyell. Hutton's view suggests that profound geological change was the cumulative product of a relatively slow continuing operation of processes which can still be seen in operation today, as opposed to catastrophism which promoted the idea that sudden changes had causes which can no longer be seen at work. A uniformitarian perspective was adopted for biological changes. Such a view can seem to contradict the fossil record, which often shows evidence of new species appearing suddenly, then persisting in that form for long periods. In the 1970s paleontologists Niles Eldredge and Stephen Jay Gould developed a theoretical model that suggests that evolution, although a slow process in human terms, undergoes periods of relatively rapid change (ranging between 50,000 and 100,000 years) alternating with long periods of relative stability. Their theory is called \"punctuated equilibrium\" and explains the fossil record without contradicting Darwin's ideas.\n\nA common unit of selection in evolution is the organism. Natural selection occurs when the reproductive success of an individual is improved or reduced by an inherited characteristic, and reproductive success is measured by the number of an individual's surviving offspring. The organism view has been challenged by a variety of biologists as well as philosophers. Richard Dawkins proposes that much insight can be gained if we look at evolution from the gene's point of view; that is, that natural selection operates as an evolutionary mechanism on genes as well as organisms. In his 1976 book, \"The Selfish Gene\", he explains:\nOthers view selection working on many levels, not just at a single level of organism or gene; for example, Stephen Jay Gould called for a hierarchical perspective on selection.\n\n\n\n", "id": "19852895", "title": "Introduction to evolution"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9670", "text": "Evolutionism\n\nEvolutionism was a common 19th century belief that organisms inherently improve themselves through progressive inherited change over time (orthogenesis), and increase in complexity through evolution. The belief went on to include cultural evolution and social evolution. In the 1970s the term Neo-Evolutionism was used to describe the idea \"that human beings sought to preserve a familiar style of life unless change was forced on them by factors that were beyond their control\".\n\nThe term is sometimes also colloquially used to refer to the modern synthesis, a scientific theory that describes how biological evolution occurs through natural selection and Mendelian genetics. In addition, the term is used in a broader sense to cover a world-view on a wide variety of topics, including chemical evolution as an alternative term for abiogenesis or for nucleosynthesis of chemical elements, galaxy formation and evolution, stellar evolution, spiritual evolution, technological evolution and universal evolution, which seeks to explain every aspect of the world in which we live.\n\nSince the overwhelming majority of scientists accept evolution as the best explanation of current data, the term is seldom used in the scientific community; to say someone is a biologist implies acceptance of evolutionary views, unless specifically noted otherwise. In the creationevolution controversy, creationists often call those who accept the validity of the modern evolutionary synthesis \"evolutionists\" and the theory itself \"evolutionism.\" Some creationists and creationist organizations, such as the Institute of Creation Research, use these terms in an effort to make it appear that evolutionary biology is a form of secular religion.\n\nEvolution originally was used to refer to an orderly sequence of events with the outcome somehow contained at the start. Darwin did not use the term in \"Origin of Species\" until its sixth edition in 1872, (though earlier editions did use the word \"evolved\") by which time Herbert Spencer had given it scientific currency with a broad definition of progression in complexity (orthogenesis) in 1862. Edward B. Tylor and Lewis H Morgan brought the term \"evolution\" to anthropology though they tended toward the older pre-Spencerian definition helping to form the concept of unilineal (social) evolution used during the later part of what Trigger calls the Antiquarianism-Imperial Synthesis period (c1770-c1900).\n\nIn modern times, the term \"evolution\" is widely used, but the terms \"evolutionism\" and \"evolutionist\" are seldom used in the scientific community to refer to the biological discipline as the term is considered both redundant and anachronistic, though it has been used by creationists in discussing the creation-evolution controversy.\n\nThe Institute for Creation Research, in order to imply placement of evolution in the category of religions, including atheism, fascism, humanism and occultism, commonly uses the words \"evolutionism\" and \"evolutionist\" to describe the consensus of mainstream science and the scientists subscribing to it, thus implying through language that the issue is a matter of religious belief.\n\nThe BioLogos Foundation, an organization that promotes the idea of theistic evolution, uses the term \"evolutionism\" to describe \"the atheistic worldview that so often accompanies the acceptance of biological evolution in public discourse.\" It views this as a subset of scientism.\n\n\n", "id": "9670", "title": "Evolutionism"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8787159", "text": "Objections to evolution\n\nObjections to evolution have been raised since evolutionary ideas came to prominence in the 19th century. When Charles Darwin published his 1859 book \"On the Origin of Species\", his theory of evolution (the idea that species arose through descent with modification from a single common ancestor in a process driven by natural selection) initially met opposition from scientists with different theories, but eventually came to receive overwhelming acceptance in the scientific community. The observation of evolutionary processes occurring (as well as the modern evolutionary synthesis explaining that evidence) has been uncontroversial among mainstream biologists since the 1940s.\n\nSince then, most criticisms and denials of evolution have come from religious groups, rather than from the scientific community. Although many religious groups have found reconciliation of their beliefs with evolution, such as through theistic evolution, other religious groups continue to reject evolutionary explanations in favor of creationism, the belief that the universe and life were created by supernatural forces. The U.S.-centered creation–evolution controversy has become a focal point of perceived conflict between religion and science.\n\nSeveral branches of creationism, including creation science, neo-creationism, and intelligent design, argue that the idea of life being directly designed by a god or intelligence is at least as scientific as evolutionary theory, and should therefore be taught in public education. Such arguments against evolution have become widespread and include objections to evolution's evidence, methodology, plausibility, morality, and scientific acceptance. The scientific community does not recognize such objections as valid, pointing to detractors' misinterpretations of such things as the scientific method, evidence, and basic physical laws.\n\nEvolutionary ideas came to prominence in the early 19th century with the theory of the transmutation of species put forward by Jean-Baptiste Lamarck. Evolution was at first opposed among the scientific community, notably by Georges Cuvier, and religious grounds. The idea that laws control nature and society gained vast popular audiences with George Combe's \"The Constitution of Man\" of 1828 and the anonymous \"Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation\" of 1844. When Charles Darwin published his 1859 book \"On the Origin of Species\", he convinced most of the scientific community that new species arise through descent through modification in a branching pattern of divergence from common ancestors, but while most scientists accepted that natural selection is a valid and empirically testable hypothesis, Darwin's view that it is the primary mechanism of evolution was rejected by some.\n\nDarwin's contemporaries eventually came to accept the transmutation of species based upon fossil evidence, and the X Club was formed to defend evolution against the church and wealthy amateurs. At that time the specific evolutionary mechanism which Darwin provided of natural selection was actively disputed by scientists in favour of alternative theories such as Lamarckism and orthogenesis. Darwin's gradualistic account was also opposed by saltationism and catastrophism. Lord Kelvin led scientific opposition to gradualism on the basis of his thermodynamic calculations that the Earth was between 24 and 400 million years old, and own views favoured a version of theistic evolution accelerated by divine guidance. This age of the earth was disputed by geological estimates, which gained strength in 1907 when radioactive dating of rocks showed that the Earth was billions of years old. The specific hereditary mechanism Darwin hypothesized of pangenesis that supported gradualism also lacked any supporting evidence and was disputed by the empirical tests of Francis Galton. Although evolution was unchallenged, uncertainties about the mechanism in the eclipse of Darwinism persisted from the 1880s until the 1930s inclusion of Mendelian inheritance and the rise of the modern evolutionary synthesis. The modern synthesis rose to universal acceptance among biologists with the help of new evidence, such as genetics, which confirmed Darwin's predictions and refuted the competing theories.\n\nProtestantism, especially in America, broke out in \"acrid polemics\" and argument about evolution from 1860 to the 1870s—with the turning point possibly marked by the death of Louis Agassiz in 1873—and by 1880 a form of \"Christian evolution\" was becoming the consensus. In Britain, while publication of \"The Descent of Man\" by Darwin in 1871 reinvigorated debate from the previous decade, Sir Henry Chadwick notes a steady acceptance of evolution \"among more educated Christians\" between 1860 and 1885. As a result, evolutionary theory was \"both permissible and respectable\" by 1876. Frederick Temple's lectures on \"The Relations between Religion and Science\" (1884) on how evolution was not \"antagonistic\" to religion highlighted this trend. Temple's appointment as Archbishop of Canterbury in 1896 demonstrated the broad acceptance of evolution within the church hierarchy.\n\nFor decades the Roman Catholic Church avoided official refutation of evolution. However, it would rein in Catholics who proposed that evolution could be reconciled with the Bible, as this conflicted with the First Vatican Council's (1869–70) finding that everything was created out of nothing by God, and to deny that finding could lead to excommunication. In 1950, the encyclical \"Humani generis\" of Pope Pius XII first mentioned evolution directly and officially. It allowed one to enquire into the concept of humans coming from pre-existing living matter, but not to question Adam and Eve or the creation of the soul. In 1996, Pope John Paul II said that evolution is \"more than a hypothesis\" and acknowledged the large body of work accumulated in its support, but reiterated that any attempt to give a material explanation of the human soul is \"incompatible with the truth about man.\" Pope Benedict XVI has reiterated the conviction that human beings \"are not some casual and meaningless product of evolution. Each of us is the result of a thought of God. Each of us is willed, each of us is loved, each of us is necessary.\" At the same time, he has promoted the study of the relationship between the concepts of creation and evolution, based on the conviction that there cannot be a contradiction between faith and reason. Along these lines, the research project Thomistic Evolution, run by a team of Dominican scholars, endeavours to reconcile the scientific evidence on evolution with the teaching of Thomas Aquinas.\n\nMuslim reaction ranged from those believing in literal creation from the Quran to many educated Muslims who subscribed to a version of theistic or guided evolution in which the Quran reinforced rather than contradicted mainstream science. This occurred relatively early, as medieval madrasahs taught the ideas of Al-Jahiz, a Muslim scholar from the 9th century, who proposed concepts similar to natural selection. However, acceptance of evolution remains low in the Muslim world, as prominent figures reject evolution's underpinning philosophy of materialism as unsound to human origins and a denial of Allah. Further objections by Muslim authors and writers largely reflect those put forward in the Western world.\n\nRegardless of acceptance from major religious hierarchies, early religious objections to Darwin's theory are still used in opposition to evolution. The ideas that species change over time through natural processes and that different species share common ancestors seemed to contradict the Genesis account of Creation. Believers in Biblical infallibility attacked Darwinism as heretical. The natural theology of the early 19th century was typified by William Paley's watchmaker analogy, an argument from design still used by the creationist movement. Natural theology included a range of ideas and arguments from the outset, and when Darwin's theory was published, ideas of theistic evolution were presented in which evolution is accepted as a secondary cause open to scientific investigation, while still holding belief in God as a first cause with a non-specified role in guiding evolution and creating humans. This position has been adopted by denominations of Christianity and Judaism in line with modernist theology which views the Bible and Torah as allegorical, thus removing the conflict between evolution and religion.\n\nHowever, in the 1920s Christian fundamentalists in the United States developed their literalist arguments against modernist theology into opposition to the teaching of evolution, with fears that Darwinism had led to German militarism and was a threat to religion and morality. This opposition developed into the creation–evolution controversy involving Christian literalists in the United States objecting to the teaching of evolution in public schools. Although early objectors dismissed evolution as contradicting their interpretation of the Bible, this argument was legally invalidated when the Supreme Court ruled in \"Epperson v. Arkansas\" in 1968 that forbidding the teaching of evolution on religious grounds violated the Establishment Clause.\n\nSince then creationists have developed more nuanced objections to evolution, alleging variously that it is unscientific, infringes on creationists' religious freedoms, or that the acceptance of evolution is a religious stance. Creationists have appealed to democratic principles of fairness, arguing that evolution is controversial and that science classrooms should therefore \"Teach the Controversy.\" These objections to evolution culminated in the intelligent design movement in the 1990s and early 2000s that unsuccessfully attempted to present itself as a scientific alternative to evolution.\n\nOne of the main sources of confusion and ambiguity in the creation–evolution debate is the definition of \"evolution\" itself. In the context of biology, evolution is genetic changes in populations of organisms over successive generations. The word also has a number of different meanings in different fields, from evolutionary computation to molecular evolution to sociocultural evolution to stellar and galactic evolution. When biological evolution is conflated with other evolutionary processes, this can cause errors such as the claim that modern evolutionary theory says anything about abiogenesis or the Big Bang.\n\n\"Evolution\" in colloquial contexts can refer to any sort of progressive development or gradual improvement, and a process that results in greater quality or complexity. When misapplied to biological evolution this common meaning leads to frequent misunderstandings. For example, the idea of devolution (\"backwards\" evolution) is a result of erroneously assuming that evolution is directional or has a specific goal in mind (cf. orthogenesis). In reality, the evolution of an organism has no \"objective\" and is only showing increasing ability of successive generations to survive and reproduce in its environment; and increased suitability is only defined in relation to this environment. Biologists do not consider any one species, such as humans, to be more \"highly evolved\" or \"advanced\" than another. Certain sources have been criticized for indicating otherwise due to a tendency to evaluate nonhuman organisms according to anthropocentric standards rather than more objective ones.\n\nEvolution also does not require that organisms become more complex. Although the history of life shows an apparent trend towards the evolution of biological complexity; there is a question if this appearance of increased complexity is real, or if it comes from neglecting the fact that the majority of life on Earth has always consisted of prokaryotes. In this view, complexity is not a necessary consequence of evolution, but that specific circumstances of evolution on Earth frequently made greater complexity advantageous and thus naturally selected for. Depending on the situation, organisms' complexity can either increase, decrease, or stay the same, and all three of these trends have been observed in evolution.\n\nCreationist sources frequently define evolution according to a colloquial, rather than scientific, meaning. As a result, many attempts to rebut evolution do not address the findings of evolutionary biology (see straw man argument). This also means that advocates of creationism and evolutionary biologists often simply speak past each other.\n\nCritics of evolution assert that evolution is \"just a theory,\" which emphasizes that scientific theories are never absolute, or misleadingly presents it as a matter of opinion rather than of fact or evidence. This reflects a difference of the meaning of \"theory\" in a scientific context: whereas in colloquial speech a \"theory\" is a conjecture or guess, in science a theory is an explanation whose predictions have been verified by experiments or other evidence. \"Evolutionary theory\" refers to an explanation for the diversity of species and their ancestry which has met extremely high standards of scientific evidence. An example of evolution as theory is the modern synthesis of Darwinian natural selection and Mendelian inheritance. As with any scientific theory, the modern synthesis is constantly debated, tested, and refined by scientists, but there is an overwhelming consensus in the scientific community that it remains the only robust model that accounts for the known facts concerning evolution.\n\nCritics also state that evolution is not a fact. In science a fact is a verified empirical observation while in colloquial contexts a fact can simply refer to anything for which there is overwhelming evidence. For example, in common usage theories such as \"the Earth revolves around the Sun\" and \"objects fall due to gravity\" may be referred to as \"facts,\" even though they are purely theoretical. From a scientific standpoint, therefore, evolution may be called a \"fact\" for the same reason that gravity can: under the scientific definition, evolution is an observable process that occurs whenever a population of organisms genetically changes over time. Under the colloquial definition, the theory of evolution can also be called a fact, referring to this theory's well-established nature. Thus, evolution is widely considered both a theory and a fact by scientists.\n\nSimilar confusion is involved in objections that evolution is \"unproven,\" since no theory in science is known to be absolutely true, only verified by empirical evidence. This distinction is an important one in philosophy of science, as it relates to the lack of absolute certainty in all empirical claims, not just evolution. Strict proof is possible only in formal sciences such as logic and mathematics, not natural sciences (where terms such as \"validated\" or \"corroborated\" are more appropriate). Thus, to say that evolution is not proven is trivially true, but no more an indictment of evolution than calling it a \"theory.\" The confusion arises in that the colloquial meaning of \"proof\" is simply \"compelling evidence,\" in which case scientists would indeed consider evolution \"proven.\"\n\nAn objection is often made in the teaching of evolution that evolution is controversial or contentious. Unlike past creationist arguments which sought to abolish the teaching of evolution altogether, this argument makes the weaker claim that evolution should be presented alongside alternative views since it is controversial, and students should be allowed to evaluate and choose between the options on their own.\n\nThis objection forms the basis of the \"Teach the Controversy\" campaign by the Discovery Institute, a think tank based in Seattle, Washington, to promote the teaching of intelligent design in U.S. public schools. This goal followed the Institute's \"wedge strategy,\" an attempt to gradually undermine evolution and ultimately to \"reverse the stifling dominance of the materialist worldview, and to replace it with a science consonant with Christian and theistic convictions.\" Several other attempts were made to insert intelligent design or creationism into the U.S. public school curriculum, including the failed Santorum Amendment in 2001.\n\nScientists and U.S. courts have rejected this objection on the grounds that science is not based on appeals to popularity, but on evidence. The scientific consensus of biologists determines what is considered acceptable science, not popular opinion or fairness, and although evolution is controversial in the public arena, it is entirely uncontroversial among experts in the field.\n\nIn response, creationists have disputed the level of scientific support for evolution. The Discovery Institute has gathered over 761 scientists as of August 2008 to sign \"A Scientific Dissent From Darwinism\" in order to show that there are a number of scientists who dispute what they refer to as \"Darwinian evolution.\" This statement did not profess outright disbelief in evolution, but expressed skepticism as to the ability of \"random mutation and natural selection to account for the complexity of life.\" Several counter-petitions have been launched in turn, including \"A Scientific Support for Darwinism\", which gathered over 7,000 signatures in four days, and Project Steve, a tongue-in-cheek petition that has gathered the signatures of 1,393 (as of May 24, 2016) evolution-supporting scientists named \"Steve\" (or any similar variation thereof—Stephen, Stephanie, Esteban, etc.).\n\nCreationists have argued for over a century that evolution is a \"theory in crisis\" that will soon be overturned, based on objections that it lacks reliable evidence or violates natural laws. These objections have been rejected by most scientists, as have claims that intelligent design, or any other creationist explanation, meets the basic scientific standards that would be required to make them scientific alternatives to evolution. It is also argued that even if evidence against evolution exists, it is a false dilemma to characterize this as evidence \"for\" intelligent design.\n\nA similar objection to evolution is that certain scientific authorities—mainly pre-modern ones—have doubted or rejected evolution. Most commonly, it is argued that Darwin \"recanted\" on his deathbed, a false anecdote originating from Lady Hope's story. These objections are generally rejected as appeals to authority.\n\nA common neo-creationist objection to evolution is that evolution does not adhere to normal scientific standards—that it is not genuinely scientific. It is argued that evolutionary biology does not follow the scientific method and therefore should not be taught in science classes, or at least should be taught alongside other views (i.e., creationism). These objections often deal with the very nature of evolutionary theory, the scientific method, and philosophy of science.\n\nCreationists commonly argue that \"evolution is a religion; it is not a science.\" The purpose of this criticism is to reframe the debate from one between science (evolution) and religion (creationism) to between two religious beliefs—or even to argue that evolution is religious while intelligent design is not. Those that oppose evolution frequently refer to supporters of evolution as \"evolutionists\" or \"Darwinists.\"\n\nThe arguments for evolution being a religion generally amount to arguments by analogy: it is argued that evolution and religion have one or more things in common, and that therefore evolution is a religion. Examples of claims made in such arguments are statements that evolution is based on faith, and that supporters of evolution dogmatically reject alternative suggestions out-of-hand. These claims have become more popular in recent years as the neo-creationist movement has sought to distance itself from religion, thus giving it more reason to make use of a seemingly anti-religious analogy.\n\nSupporters of evolution have argued in response that no scientist's claims are treated as sacrosanct, as shown by the aspects of Darwin's theory that have been rejected or revised by scientists over the years to form first neo-Darwinism and later the modern evolutionary synthesis. The claim that evolution relies on faith is likewise rejected on the grounds that evolution has strong supporting evidence, and therefore does not require faith.\n\nThe argument that evolution is religious has been rejected in general on the grounds that \"religion\" is not defined by how dogmatic or zealous its adherents are, but by its spiritual or supernatural beliefs. Evolutionary supporters point out evolution is neither dogmatic nor based on faith, and they accuse creationists of equivocating between the strict definition of \"religion\" and its colloquial usage to refer to anything that is enthusiastically or dogmatically engaged in. United States courts have also rejected this objection:\n\nAssuming for the purposes of argument, however, that evolution is a religion or religious tenet, the remedy is to stop the teaching of evolution, not establish another religion in opposition to it. Yet it is clearly established in the case law, and perhaps also in common sense, that evolution is not a religion and that teaching evolution does not violate the Establishment Clause, Epperson v. Arkansas, supra, Willoughby v. Stever, No. 15574-75 (D.D.C. May 18, 1973); aff'd. 504 F.2d 271 (D.C. Cir. 1974), cert. denied , 420 U.S. 924 (1975); Wright v. Houston Indep. School Dist., 366 F. Supp. 1208 (S.D. Tex 1978), aff.d. 486 F.2d 137 (5th Cir. 1973), cert. denied 417 U.S. 969 (1974).\n\nA related claim is that evolution is atheistic (see the Atheism section below); creationists sometimes merge the two claims and describe evolution as an \"atheistic religion\" (cf. humanism). This argument against evolution is also frequently generalized into a criticism of all science; it is argued that \"science is an atheistic religion,\" on the grounds that its methodological naturalism is as unproven, and thus as \"faith-based,\" as the supernatural and theistic beliefs of creationism.\n\nA statement is considered falsifiable if there is an observation or a test that could be made that would demonstrate that the statement is false. Statements that are not falsifiable cannot be examined by scientific investigation since they permit no tests that evaluate their accuracy. Creationists such as Henry M. Morris have claimed that any observation can be fitted into the evolutionary framework, so it is impossible to demonstrate that evolution is wrong and therefore evolution is non-scientific.\n\nSupporters of evolution argue that evolution is shown falsifiable by many conceivable lines of evidence that could falsify evolution, such as the fossil record showing no change over time, confirmation that mutations are prevented from accumulating, or observations showing organisms being created supernaturally or spontaneously. Many of Darwin's ideas and assertions of fact have been falsified as evolutionary science has developed and has continued to confirm his central concepts. In contrast, creationist explanations involving the direct intervention of the supernatural in the physical world are not falsifiable, because any result of an experiment or investigation could be the unpredictable action of an omnipotent deity.\n\nIn 1976, the philosopher Karl Popper said that \"Darwinism is not a testable scientific theory but a metaphysical research programme.\" He later changed his mind and argued that Darwin's \"theory of natural selection is difficult to test\" with respect to other areas of science.\n\nThe most direct evidence that evolutionary theory is falsifiable may be the original words of Charles Darwin in chapter 6 of \"On the Origin of Species\": \"If it could be demonstrated that any complex organ existed, which could not possibly have been formed by numerous, successive, slight modifications, my theory would absolutely break down.\" If empirical evidence supported this instance, it would be affirmation of the creationist argument in favor of irreducible complexity.\n\nIn response to the unfalsifiability criticism of evolutionary theory, numerous examples of potential ways to falsify evolution have been proposed. J. B. S. Haldane, when asked what hypothetical evidence could disprove evolution, replied \"fossil rabbits in the Precambrian era.\" Numerous other potential ways to falsify evolution have also been proposed. For example, the fact that humans have one fewer pair of chromosomes than the great apes offered a testable hypothesis involving the fusion or splitting of chromosomes from a common ancestor. The fusion hypothesis was confirmed in 2005 by discovery that human chromosome 2 is homologous with a fusion of two chromosomes that remain separate in other primates. Extra, inactive telomeres and centromeres remain on human chromosome 2 as a result of the fusion. The assertion of common descent could also have been disproven with the invention of DNA sequencing methods. If true, human DNA should be far more similar to chimpanzees and other great apes, than to other mammals. If not, then common descent is falsified. DNA analysis has shown that humans and chimpanzees share a large percentage of their DNA (between 95% to 99.4% depending on the measure). Also, the evolution of chimpanzees and humans from a common ancestor predicts a (geologically) recent common ancestor. Numerous transitional fossils have since been found. Hence, human evolution has passed several falsifiable tests.\n\nA related claim is that natural selection is tautological. Specifically, it is often argued that the phrase \"survival of the fittest\" is a tautology, in that fitness is defined as ability to survive and reproduce. This phrase was first used by Herbert Spencer in 1864 but is rarely used by biologists. Additionally, fitness is more accurately defined as the state of possessing traits that make survival more likely; this definition, unlike simple \"survivability,\" avoids being trivially true.\n\nSimilarly, it is argued that evolutionary theory is circular reasoning, in that evidence is interpreted as supporting evolution, but evolution is required to interpret the evidence. An example of this is the claim that geological strata are dated through the fossils they hold, but that fossils are in turn dated by the strata they are in. However, in most cases strata are not dated by their fossils, but by their position relative to other strata and by radiometric dating, and most strata were dated before the theory of evolution was formulated.\n\nIn his 1982 book, \"Abusing Science: The Case Against Creationism\", philosopher of science Philip Kitcher specifically addresses the \"falsifiability\" question by taking into account notable philosophical critiques of Popper by Carl Gustav Hempel and Willard Van Orman Quine and provides a definition of theory other than as a set of falsifiable statements. As Kitcher points out, if one took a strictly Popperian view of \"theory,\" observations of Uranus when it was first discovered in 1781 would have \"falsified\" Isaac Newton's celestial mechanics. Rather, people suggested that another planet influenced Uranus' orbit—and this prediction was indeed eventually confirmed. Kitcher agrees with Popper that \"there is surely something right in the idea that a science can succeed only if it can fail.\" But he insists that we view scientific theories as consisting of an \"elaborate collection of statements,\" some of which are not falsifiable, and others—what he calls \"auxiliary hypotheses,\" which are.\n\nObjections to the evidence that evolution occurs tend to be more concrete and specific, often involving direct analysis of evolutionary biology's methods and claims.\n\nA common claim of creationists is that evolution has never been observed. Challenges to such objections often come down to debates over how evolution is defined (see the Defining evolution section above). Under the conventional biological definition of \"evolution\", it is a simple matter to observe evolution occurring. Evolutionary processes, in the form of populations changing their genetic composition from generation to generation, have been observed in different scientific contexts, including the evolution of fruit flies, mice, and bacteria in the laboratory, and of tilapia in the field. Such studies on experimental evolution, particularly those using microorganisms, are now providing important insights into how evolution occurs, especially in the case of antibiotic resistance.\n\nIn response to such examples, creationists specify that they are objecting only to macroevolution, not microevolution: most creationist organizations do not dispute the occurrence of short-term, relatively minor evolutionary changes, such as that observed even in dog breeding. Rather, they dispute the occurrence of major evolutionary changes over long periods of time, which by definition cannot be directly observed, only inferred from microevolutionary processes and the traces of macroevolutionary ones.\n\nAs biologists define \"macroevolution\", both microevolution and macroevolution have been observed. Speciations, for example, have been directly observed many times, despite popular misconceptions to the contrary. Additionally, the modern evolutionary synthesis draws no distinction in the processes described by the theory of evolution when considering macroevolution and microevolution as the former is simply at the species level or above and the latter is below the species level. An example of this is ring species.\n\nAdditionally, past macroevolution can be inferred from historical traces. Transitional fossils, for example, provide plausible links between several different groups of organisms, such as \"Archaeopteryx\" linking birds and dinosaurs, or the \"Tiktaalik\" linking fish and limbed amphibians. Creationists dispute such examples, from asserting that such fossils are hoaxes or that they belong exclusively to one group or the other, to asserting that there should be far more evidence of obvious transitional species. Darwin himself found the paucity of transitional species to be one of the greatest weaknesses of his theory: Why then is not every geological formation and every stratum full of such intermediate links? Geology assuredly does not reveal any such finely graduated organic chain; and this, perhaps, is the most obvious and gravest objection which can be urged against my theory. The explanation lies, as I believe, in the extreme imperfection of the geological record. Darwin appealed to the limited collections then available, the extreme lengths of time involved, and different rates of change with some living species differing very little from fossils of the Silurian period. In later editions he added \"that the periods during which species have been undergoing modification, though very long as measured by years, have probably been short in comparison with the periods during which these same species remained without undergoing any change.\" The number of clear transitional fossils has increased enormously since Darwin's day, and this problem has been largely resolved with the advent of the theory of punctuated equilibrium, which predicts a primarily stable fossil record broken up by occasional major speciations.\n\nAs more and more compelling direct evidence for inter-species and species-to-species evolution has been gathered, creationists have redefined their understanding of what amounts to \"created kinds,\" and have continued to insist that more dramatic demonstrations of evolution be experimentally produced. One version of this objection is \"Were you there?,\" popularized by young Earth creationist Ken Ham. It argues that because no one except God could directly observe events in the distant past, scientific claims are just speculation or \"story-telling.\" DNA sequences of the genomes of organisms allow an independent test of their predicted relationships, since species which diverged more recently will be more closely related genetically than species which are more distantly related; such phylogenetic trees show a hierarchical organization within the tree of life, as predicted by common descent.\n\nIn fields such as astrophysics or meteorology, where direct observation or laboratory experiments are difficult or impossible, the scientific method instead relies on observation and logical inference. In such fields, the test of falsifiability is satisfied when a theory is used to predict the results of new observations. When such observations contradict a theory's predictions, it may be revised or discarded if an alternative better explains the observed facts. For example, Newton's theory of gravitation was replaced by Albert Einstein's theory of general relativity when the latter was observed to more precisely predict the orbit of Mercury.\n\nA related objection is that evolution is based on unreliable evidence, claiming that evolution is not even well-evidenced. Typically, this is either based on the argument that evolution's evidence is full of frauds and hoaxes, that current evidence for evolution is likely to be overturned as some past evidence has been, or that certain types of evidence are inconsistent and dubious.\n\nArguments against evolution's reliability are thus often based on analyzing the history of evolutionary thought or the history of science in general. Creationists point out that in the past, major scientific revolutions have overturned theories that were at the time considered near-certain. They thus claim that current evolutionary theory is likely to undergo such a revolution in the future, on the basis that it is a \"theory in crisis\" for one reason or another.\n\nCritics of evolution commonly appeal to past scientific hoaxes such as the Piltdown Man forgery. It is argued that because scientists have been mistaken and deceived in the past about evidence for various aspects of evolution, the current evidence for evolution is likely to also be based on fraud and error. Much of the evidence for evolution has been accused of being fraudulent at various times, including \"Archaeopteryx\", peppered moth melanism, and Darwin's finches; these claims have been subsequently refuted.\n\nIt has also been claimed that certain former pieces of evidence for evolution which are now considered out-of-date and erroneous, such as Ernst Haeckel's 19th-century comparative drawings of embryos, used to illustrate his recapitulation theory (\"\"ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny\"\"), were not merely errors but frauds. Molecular biologist Jonathan Wells criticizes biology textbooks by alleging that they continue to reproduce such evidence after it has been debunked. In response, the National Center for Science Education notes that none of the textbooks reviewed by Wells makes the claimed error, as Haeckel's drawings are shown in a historical context with discussion about why they are wrong, and the accurate modern drawings and photos used in the textbooks are misrepresented by Wells.\n\nCreationists claim that evolution relies on certain types of evidence that do not give reliable information about the past. For example, it is argued that radiometric dating technique of evaluating a material's age based on the radioactive decay rates of certain isotopes generates inconsistent and thus unreliable results. Radiocarbon dating based on the carbon-14 isotope has been particularly criticized. It is argued that radiometric decay relies on a number of unwarranted assumptions such as the principle of uniformitarianism, consistent decay rates, or rocks acting as closed systems. Such arguments have been dismissed by scientists on the grounds that independent methods have confirmed the reliability of radiometric dating as a whole; additionally, different radiometric dating methods and techniques have independently confirmed each other's results.\n\nAnother form of this objection is that fossil evidence is not reliable. This is based on a much wider range of claims. These include that there are too many \"gaps\" in the fossil record, that fossil-dating is circular (see the Unfalsifiability section above), or that certain fossils, such as polystrate fossils, are seemingly \"out of place.\" Examination by geologists have found polystrate fossils to be consistent with \"in situ\" formation. It is argued that certain features of evolution support creationism's catastrophism (cf. Great Flood), rather than evolution's gradualistic punctuated equilibrium, which some assert is an \"ad hoc\" theory to explain the fossil gaps.\n\nSome of the oldest and most common objections to evolution dispute whether evolution can truly account for all the apparent complexity and order in the natural world. It is argued that evolution is too unlikely or otherwise lacking to account for various aspects of life, and therefore that an intelligence, such as God of the Abrahamic religions, must at the very least be appealed to for those specific features.\n\nA common objection to evolution is that it is simply too unlikely for life, in its complexity and apparent \"design,\" to have arisen \"by chance.\" It is argued that the odds of life having arisen without a deliberate intelligence guiding it are so astronomically low that it is unreasonable \"not\" to infer an intelligent designer from the natural world, and specifically from the diversity of life. A more extreme version of this argument is that evolution cannot create complex structures (see the Creation of complex structures section below). The idea that it is simply too implausible for life to have evolved is often wrongly encapsulated with a quotation that the \"probability of life originating on Earth is no greater than the chance that a hurricane, sweeping through a scrapyard, would have the luck to assemble a Boeing 747\"—a claim attributed to astrophysicist Fred Hoyle and known as Hoyle's fallacy. Hoyle was a Darwinist, atheist and anti-theist, but advocated the theory of panspermia, in which abiogenesis begins in outer space and primitive life on Earth is held to have arrived via natural dispersion.\n\nViews superficially similar, but unrelated to Hoyle's, are thus invariably justified with arguments from analogy. The basic idea of this argument for a designer is the teleological argument, an argument for the existence of God based on the perceived order or purposefulness of the universe. A common way of using this as an objection to evolution is by appealing to the 18th-century philosopher William Paley's watchmaker analogy, which argues that certain natural phenomena are analogical to a watch (in that they are ordered, or complex, or purposeful), which means that, like a watch, they must have been designed by a \"watchmaker\"—an intelligent agent. This argument forms the core of intelligent design, a neo-creationist movement seeking to establish certain variants of the design argument as legitimate science, rather than as philosophy or theology, and have them be taught alongside evolution.\n\nThis objection is fundamentally an argument by lack of imagination, or argument from incredulity: a certain explanation is seen as being counterintuitive, and therefore an alternate, more intuitive explanation is appealed to instead. Supporters of evolution generally respond by arguing that evolution is not based on \"chance,\" but on predictable chemical interactions: natural processes, rather than supernatural beings, are the \"designer.\" Although the process involves some random elements, it is the non-random selection of survival-enhancing genes that drives evolution along an ordered trajectory. The fact that the results are ordered and seem \"designed\" is no more evidence for a supernatural intelligence than the appearance of complex natural phenomena (e.g. snowflakes). It is also argued that there is insufficient evidence to make statements about the plausibility or implausibility of abiogenesis, that certain structures demonstrate poor design, and that the implausibility of life evolving exactly as it did is no more evidence for an intelligence than the implausibility of a deck of cards being shuffled and dealt in a certain random order.\n\nIt has also been noted that arguments against some form of life arising \"by chance\" are really objections to nontheistic abiogenesis, not to evolution. Indeed, arguments against \"evolution\" are based on the misconception that abiogenesis is a component of, or necessary precursor to, evolution. Similar objections sometimes conflate the Big Bang with evolution.\n\nChristian apologist and philosopher Alvin Plantinga, a supporter of intelligent design, has formalized and revised the improbability argument as the evolutionary argument against naturalism, which asserts that it is irrational to reject a supernatural, intelligent creator because the apparent probability of certain faculties evolving is so low. Specifically, Plantinga claims that evolution cannot account for the rise of reliable reasoning faculties. Plantinga argues that whereas a God would be expected to create beings with reliable reasoning faculties, evolution would be just as likely to lead to unreliable ones, meaning that if evolution is true, it is irrational to trust whatever reasoning one relies on to conclude that it is true. This novel epistemological argument has been criticized similarly to other probabilistic design arguments. It has also been argued that rationality, if conducive to survival, is more likely to be selected for than irrationality, making the natural development of reliable cognitive faculties more likely than unreliable ones.\n\nA related argument against evolution is that most mutations are harmful. However, the vast majority of mutations are neutral, and the minority of mutations which are beneficial or harmful are often situational; a mutation that is harmful in one environment may be helpful in another.\n\nIn addition to complex structures and systems, among the phenomena that critics variously claim evolution cannot explain are consciousness, hominid intelligence, instincts, emotions, metamorphosis, photosynthesis, homosexuality, music, language, religion, morality, and altruism (see altruism in animals). Most of these, such as hominid intelligence, instinct, emotion, photosynthesis, language, and altruism, have been well-explained by evolution, while others remain mysterious, or only have preliminary explanations. Supporters of evolution further contend that no alternative explanation has been able to adequately explain the biological origin of these phenomena either.\n\nCreationists argue against evolution on the grounds that it cannot explain certain non-evolutionary processes, such as abiogenesis, the Big Bang, or the meaning of life. In such instances, \"evolution\" is being redefined to refer to the entire history of the universe, and it is argued that if one aspect of the universe is seemingly inexplicable, the entire body of scientific theories must be baseless. At this point, objections leave the arena of evolutionary biology and become general scientific or philosophical disputes.\n\nAstronomers Fred Hoyle and Chandra Wickramasinghe have argued in favor of cosmic ancestry, and against abiogenesis and evolution.\n\nThis class of objections is more radical than the above, claiming that a major aspect of evolution is not merely unscientific or implausible, but rather impossible, because it contradicts some other law of nature or is constrained in such a way that it cannot produce the biological diversity of the world.\n\nModern evolutionary theory posits that all biological systems must have evolved incrementally, through a combination of natural selection and genetic drift. Both Darwin and his early detractors recognized the potential problems that could arise for his theory of natural selection if the lineage of organs and other biological features could not be accounted for by gradual, step-by-step changes over successive generations; if all the intermediary stages between an initial organ and the organ it will become are not all improvements upon the original, it will be impossible for the later organ to develop by the process of natural selection alone. Complex organs such as the eye had been presented by William Paley as exemplifying the need for design by God, and anticipating early criticisms that the evolution of the eye and other complex organs seemed impossible, Darwin noted that:\n\n[R]eason tells me, that if numerous gradations from a perfect and complex eye to one very imperfect and simple, each grade being useful to its possessor, can be shown to exist; if further, the eye does vary ever so slightly, and the variations be inherited, which is certainly the case; and if any variation or modification in the organ be ever useful to an animal under changing conditions of life, then the difficulty of believing that a perfect and complex eye could be formed by natural selection, though insuperable by our imagination, can hardly be considered real.\n\nSimilarly, ethologist and evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins said on the topic of the evolution of the feather in an interview for the television program \"The Atheism Tapes\":\nThere's got to be a series of advantages all the way in the feather. If you can't think of one, then that's your problem not natural selection's problem... It's perfectly possible feathers began as fluffy extensions of reptilian scales to act as insulators... The earliest feathers might have been a different approach to hairiness among reptiles keeping warm.\nCreationist arguments have been made such as \"What use is half an eye?\" and \"What use is half a wing?\". Research has confirmed that the natural evolution of the eye and other intricate organs is entirely feasible. Creationist claims have persisted that such complexity evolving without a designer is inconceivable and this objection to evolution has been refined in recent years as the more sophisticated irreducible complexity argument of the intelligent design movement, formulated by Michael Behe. Biochemist Michael Behe has argued that current evolutionary theory cannot account for certain complex structures, particularly in microbiology. On this basis, Behe argues that such structures were \"purposely arranged by an intelligent agent.\"\n\nIrreducible complexity is the idea that certain biological systems cannot be broken down into their constituent parts and remain functional, and therefore that they could not have evolved naturally from less complex or complete systems. Whereas past arguments of this nature generally relied on macroscopic organs, Behe's primary examples of irreducible complexity have been cellular and biochemical in nature. He has argued that the components of systems such as the blood clotting cascade, the immune system, and the bacterial flagellum are so complex and interdependent that they could not have evolved from simpler systems.\n\nIn the years since Behe proposed irreducible complexity, new developments and advances in biology, such as an improved understanding of the evolution of flagella, have already undermined these arguments. The idea that seemingly irreducibly complex systems cannot evolve has been refuted through evolutionary mechanisms, such as exaptation (the adaptation of organs for entirely new functions) and the use of \"scaffolding,\" which are initially necessary features of a system that later degenerate when they are no longer required. Potential evolutionary pathways have been provided for all of the systems Behe used as examples of irreducible complexity.\n\nThe Cambrian explosion was the relatively rapid appearance around of most major animal phyla as demonstrated in the fossil record, and many more phyla now extinct. This was accompanied by major diversification of other organisms. Prior to the Cambrian explosion most organisms were simple, composed of individual cells occasionally organized into colonies. Over the following 70 or 80 million years, the rate of diversification accelerated by an order of magnitude and the diversity of life began to resemble that of today, although they did not resemble the species of today.\n\nThe basic problem with this is that natural selection calls for the slow accumulation of changes, where a new phyla would take longer than a new class which would take longer than a new order, which would take longer than a new family, which would take longer than a new genus would take longer than emergence of a new species but the apparent occurrence of high-level taxa without precedents is perhaps implying unusual evolutionary mechanisms.\n\nThere is general consensus that many factors helped trigger the Cambrian explosion, but there is no generally accepted consensus about the combination and the Cambrian explosion continues to be an area of controversy and research over why so rapid, why at the phylum level, why so many phyla then and none since, and even if the apparent fossil record is accurate.\n\nAn example of opinions involving the commonly cited rise in oxygen Great Oxidation Event from biologist PZ Myers summarizes: \"What it was was environmental changes, in particular the bioturbation revolution caused by the evolution of worms that released buried nutrients, and the steadily increasing oxygen content of the atmosphere that allowed those nutrients to fuel growth; ecological competition, or a kind of arms race, that gave a distinct selective advantage to novelties that allowed species to occupy new niches; and the evolution of developmental mechanisms that enabled multicellular organisms to generate new morphotypes readily.\" The increase in molecular oxygen (O) also may have allowed the formation of the protective ozone layer (O) that helps shield Earth from lethal UV radiation from the Sun.\n\nA recent objection of creationists to evolution is that evolutionary mechanisms such as mutation cannot generate new information. Creationists such as William A. Dembski, Werner Gitt, and Lee Spetner have attempted to use information theory to dispute evolution. Dembski has argued that life demonstrates specified complexity, and proposed a law of conservation of information that extremely improbable \"complex specified information\" could be conveyed by natural means but never originated without an intelligent agent. Gitt asserted that information is an intrinsic characteristic of life and that an analysis demonstrates the mind and will of their Creator.\n\nThese claims have been widely rejected by the scientific community which asserts that new information is regularly generated in evolution whenever a novel mutation or gene duplication arises. Dramatic examples of entirely new and unique traits arising through mutation have been observed in recent years, such as the evolution of nylon-eating bacteria which developed new enzymes to efficiently digest a material that never existed before the modern era. There is no need to account for the creation of information when an organism is considered together with the environment it evolved in. The information in the genome forms a record of how it was possible to survive in a particular environment. The information is gathered from the environment through trial and error as mutating organisms either reproduce or fail.\n\nAnother objection is that evolution violates the second law of thermodynamics. The law states that \"the entropy of an isolated system not in equilibrium will tend to increase over time, approaching a maximum value at equilibrium\". In other words, an isolated system's entropy (a measure of the dispersal of energy in a physical system so that it is not available to do mechanical work) will tend to increase or stay the same, not decrease. Creationists argue that evolution violates this physical law by requiring a decrease in entropy, or disorder, over time.\n\nThe claims have been criticized for ignoring that the second law only applies to isolated systems. Organisms are open systems as they constantly exchange energy and matter with their environment: for example animals eat food and excrete waste, and radiate and absorb heat. It is argued that the Sun-Earth-space system does not violate the second law because the enormous increase in entropy due to the Sun and Earth radiating into space dwarfs the local decrease in entropy caused by the existence and evolution of self-organizing life.\n\nSince the second law of thermodynamics has a precise mathematical definition, this argument can be analyzed quantitatively. This was done by physicist Daniel F. Styer, who concluded: \"Quantitative estimates of the entropy involved in biological evolution demonstrate that there is no conflict between evolution and the second law of thermodynamics.\"\n\nIn a published letter to the editor of \"The Mathematical Intelligencer\" titled \"How anti-evolutionists abuse mathematics,\" mathematician Jason Rosenhouse stated:\nThe fact is that natural forces routinely lead to local decreases in entropy. Water freezes into ice and fertilised eggs turn into babies. Plants use sunlight to convert carbon dioxide and water into sugar and oxygen, but [we do] not invoke divine intervention to explain the process [...] thermodynamics offers nothing to dampen our confidence in Darwinism.\n\nOther common objections to evolution allege that evolution leads to objectionable results, including bad beliefs, behaviors, and events. It is argued that the teaching of evolution degrades values, undermines morals, and fosters irreligion or atheism. These may be considered appeals to consequences (a form of logical fallacy), as the potential ramifications of belief in evolutionary theory have nothing to do with its objective empirical reality.\n\nIn biological classification humans are animals, a basic point which has been known for more than 2,000 years. The creationist J. Rendle-Short asserted in \"Creation\" magazine that if people are taught evolution they can be expected to behave like animals: since animals behave in all sorts of different ways, this is meaningless. In evolutionary terms, humans are able to acquire knowledge and change their behaviour to meet social standards, so humans behave in the manner of other humans.\n\nIn 1917, Vernon Kellogg published \"Headquarters Nights: A Record of Conversations and Experiences at the Headquarters of the German Army in France and Belgium\", which asserted that German intellectuals were totally committed to might-makes-right due to \"whole-hearted acceptance of the worst of Neo-Darwinism, the \"Allmacht\" of natural selection applied rigorously to human life and society and \"Kultur\".\" This strongly influenced the politician William Jennings Bryan, who saw Darwinism as a moral threat to America and campaigned against evolutionary theory; his campaign culminated in the Scopes Trial, which effectively prevented teaching of evolution in most public schools until the 1960s.\n\nR. Albert Mohler, Jr., president of the Southern Baptist Theological Seminary in Louisville, Kentucky, wrote August 8, 2005, in NPR's \"Taking Issue\" essay series, that \"Debates over education, abortion, environmentalism, homosexuality and a host of other issues are really debates about the origin — and thus the meaning — of human life. ...evolutionary theory stands at the base of moral relativism and the rejection of traditional morality.\"\n\nHenry M. Morris, engineering professor and founder of the Creation Research Society and the Institute of Creation Research, claims that evolution was part of a pagan religion that emerged after the Tower of Babel, was part of Plato's and Aristotle's philosophies, and was responsible for everything from war to pornography to the breakup of the nuclear family. He has also claimed that perceived social ills like crime, teenage pregnancies, homosexuality, abortion, immorality, wars, and genocide are caused by a belief in evolution.\n\nRev. D. James Kennedy of The Center for Reclaiming America for Christ and Coral Ridge Ministries claims that Darwin was responsible for Adolf Hitler's atrocities. In Kennedy's documentary and the accompanying pamphlet with the same title, \"Darwin's Deadly Legacy\", Kennedy states that \"To put it simply, no Darwin, no Hitler.\" In his efforts to expose the \"harmful effects that evolution is still having on our nation, our children, and our world,\" Kennedy also states that, \"We have had 150 years of the theory of Darwinian evolution, and what has it brought us? Whether Darwin intended it or not, millions of deaths, the destruction of those deemed inferior, the devaluing of human life, increasing hopelessness.\" The Discovery Institute's Center for Science and Culture fellow Richard Weikart has made similar claims, as have other creationists. The claim was central to the documentary film \"\" (2008) promoting intelligent design creationism. The Anti-Defamation League describes such claims as outrageous misuse of the Holocaust and its imagery, and as trivializing the \"...many complex factors that led to the mass extermination of European Jewry. Hitler did not need Darwin or evolution to devise his heinous plan to exterminate the Jewish people, and Darwin and evolutionary theory cannot explain Hitler's genocidal madness. Moreover, anti-Semitism existed long before Darwin ever wrote a word.\"\n\nYoung Earth creationist Kent Hovind blames communism, socialism, World War I, World War II, racism, the Holocaust, Stalin's war crimes, the Vietnam War, and Pol Pot's Killing Fields on evolution, as well as the increase in crime, unwed mothers, and other social ills. Hovind's son Eric Hovind claims that evolution is responsible for tattoos, body piercing, premarital sex, unwed births, sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), divorce, and child abuse.\n\nSupporters of evolution dismiss such criticisms as counterfactual, and some argue that the opposite seems to be the case. A study published by the author and illustrator Gregory S. Paul found that religious beliefs, including belief in creationism and disbelief in evolution, are positively correlated with social ills like crime. The Barna Group surveys find that Christians and non-Christians in the U.S. have similar divorce rates, and the highest divorce rates in the U.S. are among Baptists and Pentecostals, both sects which reject evolution and embrace creationism.\n\nMichael Shermer argued in \"Scientific American\" in October 2006 that evolution supports concepts like family values, avoiding lies, fidelity, moral codes and the rule of law. He goes on to suggest that evolution gives more support to the notion of an omnipotent creator, rather than a tinkerer with limitations based on a human model, the more common image subscribed to by creationists. Careful analysis of the creationist charges that evolution has led to moral relativism and the Holocaust yields the conclusion that these charges appear to be highly suspect. Such analyses conclude that the origins of the Holocaust are more likely to be found in historical Christian anti-Semitism than in evolution.\n\nEvolution has been used to justify Social Darwinism, the exploitation of so-called \"lesser breeds without the law\" by \"superior races,\" particularly in the nineteenth century. Typically strong European nations that had successfully expanded their empires could be said to have \"survived\" in the struggle for dominance. With this attitude, Europeans except for Christian missionaries rarely adopted any customs and languages of local people under their empires.\n\nAnother charge leveled at evolutionary theory by creationists is that belief in evolution is either tantamount to atheism, or conducive to atheism. It is commonly claimed that all proponents of evolutionary theory are \"materialistic atheists.\" On the other hand, Davis A. Young argues that creation science \"itself\" is harmful to Christianity because its bad science will turn more away than it recruits. Young asks, \"Can we seriously expect non-Christians to develop a respect for Christianity if we insist on teaching the brand of science that creationism brings with it?\" However, evolution neither requires nor rules out the existence of a supernatural being. Philosopher Robert T. Pennock makes the comparison that evolution is no more atheistic than plumbing. H. Allen Orr, professor of biology at University of Rochester, notes that:\n\nIn addition, a wide range of religions have reconciled a belief in a supernatural being with evolution. Molleen Matsumura of the National Center for Science Education found that \"of Americans in the twelve largest Christian denominations, 89.6% belong to churches that support evolution education.\" These churches include the \"United Methodist Church, National Baptist Convention USA, Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, Presbyterian Church (USA), National Baptist Convention of America, African Methodist Episcopal Church, the Roman Catholic Church, the Episcopal Church, and others.\" A poll in 2000 done for People for the American Way found that 70% of the American public felt that evolution was compatible with a belief in God. Only 48% of the people polled could choose the correct definition of evolution from a list, however.\n\nOne poll reported in the journal \"Nature\" showed that among American scientists (across various disciplines), about 40 percent believe in both evolution and an active deity (theistic evolution). This is similar to the results reported for surveys of the general American public. Also, about 40 percent of the scientists polled believe in a God that answers prayers, and believe in immortality. While about 55% of scientists surveyed were atheists, agnostics, or nonreligious theists, atheism is far from universal among scientists who support evolution, or among the general public that supports evolution. Very similar results were reported from a 1997 Gallup Poll of the American public and scientists.\n\nTraditionalists still object to the idea that diversity in life, including human beings, arose through natural processes without a need for supernatural intervention, and they argue against evolution on the basis that it contradicts their literal interpretation of creation myths about separate \"created kinds.\" However, many religions, such as Catholicism, have reconciled their beliefs with evolution through theistic evolution.\n\n\n\n", "id": "8787159", "title": "Objections to evolution"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9499590", "text": "Postnaturalism\n\nPostnaturalism is the theory of the postnatural, a term coined to describe organisms that have been intentionally and heritably altered by humans. Postnaturalism is a cultural process whereby organisms are bred to satisfy a specific cultural purpose. It can be used to read these organisms, which serve as insights into our culture by reflecting desires and beliefs prevalent at the time of breeding. This has direct implications for the evolutionary path of these organisms, whittling down undesirable traits to leave only those culturally sought out. Postnaturalism argues that in so doing, humans have and continue to actively alter the evolutionary path of a postnatural organism to suit our cultural desires. The agricultural practice of monoculture, for instance, is just one example of postnatural organisms who have been bred to such an extent that the modern-day species look nothing like their pre-neolithic counterparts. The breeding of these species for this purpose can be seen to be reflected in notable diet changes during this period, which proliferated during ensuing sedentism and urbanisation.\n\nPostnaturalism is a highly selective process. For every organism that has become used in our society, there are countless more that have remained non-postnatural for whatever reason ranging from a perceived lack of future use from them or traits that make them too difficult to farm. One such example is the golden orb-weaver spider which produces a strong, light and useful silk, however they are known to be cannibalistic and thus impossible to farm on a large scale.\n\nPostnatural history is defined as the \"study of the origins, habitats, and evolution of organisms that have been \"intentionally\" and \"heritably\" altered by humans\", which serves as a \"record of the influence of human culture on evolution\". So termed to differentiate it from traditional natural history studies, it is the subject of a storefront in Pittsburgh, United States called the Center for PostNatural History, which builds on this concept to produce an array of displays of organisms which are all postnatural.\n\nThe commencement of the postnatural can be considered to date back to prehistoric civilisation's early interaction with wild species. Here, domestication occurred as a way of adapting the environment around prehistoric people to suit their needs and desires through a gradual process of refinement. Domestication succeeds through the heritable continuation of an organism's phenotype and genotype allowing each generation to continue on from their previous generation. In its simplest terms, domestication alters a species through survival to a change in habitat, food source, or other significant change. These changes can be sought for a variety of different reasons including physical attributes, behavioural characteristics, lifespan, and adaptability to a change in environment.\n\nPostnatural practices include selective breeding, a process by which humans purposefully breed certain organisms for particular biological traits. The practice was known to the Romans, and has been commonly used continuing to this day. Michael Pollan argues that Charles Darwin saw this process and considered it artificial, rather than natural, selection, but in terms of evolutionary progress this distinction becomes irrelevant to the species; the change is irreversible all the same. This is simply because evolution is understood to be unable to 'undo' previous changes, but, particularly in proteins, continues along in a progression of its biological structure depending on what traits are required for survival.\n\nInduced mutation in the context of postnaturalism is the process whereby a specific genetic mutation - usually a rare occurrence - is selectively isolated by people and encouraged to reproduce in future offspring. This differs from the general understanding of a mutation that was induced by treatment from a particular chemical agent in a living species.\n\nA good example of this is the albino rat which possesses, in the wild a notoriously fatal genetic make-up making it much easier to identify to predators, a coat which drew interest in breeders so as to distinguish them from their more unhygienic-looking sewer counterparts prevalent in major cities in the 1800s. So numerous were rats in industrial cities, they became the subject of a sport based on their extermination, rat-baiting. The albino rat thus became distinguished from the regular unsightly sewer rat and even became sold as pets, the owning of one as a child allegedly the basis for Beatrix Potter's book \"Samuel Whiskers\".\n\nGenetic Engineering can be considered to be the purposeful alteration of the genetic makeup of an organism through the introduction of genes from sources not belonging to that organism. The isolation of a particular gene and introduction of another is often achieved through the use of biotechnology more broadly.\nGenetic engineering is a contentious topic and even in searching for a definition, there are several alternatives available highlighting the variation in perceptions around what is considered to be the goal and process of genetic engineering. However, genetic engineering embodies much of what is considered postnatural, but doing so with the next level of technology than used in previous methods such as those mentioned in the above sections. Increased use of advanced technology allows for improved precision and accuracy of methods, and carrying out of transgenics, whilst the use of laboratories as settings is designed to prevent the release of experimented organisms into the wild unless cleared with the relevant protocols and regulations beforehand.\n\nThe current agricultural practice of monoculture is intricately connected with postnaturalism, particularly now much of common contemporary agricultural practice has become mechanised. This mechanisation sometimes requires universality to comply with existing tools, machines and practices, such as the breeding of chickens to be a uniform size to ensure they fit into chicken harvesting machines. On other occasions rather than breed a particular species to a uniform size, some parts of organisms have been so heavily bred and altered that dystocia can regularly occur, such as with the Belgian Blue cattle whose birth canal regularly becomes constricted or even entirely blocked due to the birth canal's reduced size and the increased size of calves. The result is the routine scheduling of Caesarian sections.\n", "id": "9499590", "title": "Postnaturalism"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8241706", "text": "List of non-fictional lost worlds\n\nThis is a list of non-fictional lost worlds, where the terrain has been isolated from its geological surroundings, and thus gained an independent ecological evolution, often resulting in the birth of species endemic to that area.\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n", "id": "8241706", "title": "List of non-fictional lost worlds"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=627964", "text": "Survival of the fittest\n\n\"Survival of the fittest\" is a phrase that originated from Darwinian evolutionary theory as a way of describing the mechanism of natural selection. The biological concept of fitness is defined as reproductive success. In Darwinian terms the phrase is best understood as \"Survival of the form that will leave the most copies of itself in successive generations.\"\n\nHerbert Spencer first used the phrase, after reading Charles Darwin's \"On the Origin of Species\", in his \"Principles of Biology\" (1864), in which he drew parallels between his own economic theories and Darwin's biological ones: \"This survival of the fittest, which I have here sought to express in mechanical terms, is that which Mr. Darwin has called 'natural selection', or the preservation of favoured races in the struggle for life.\"\n\nDarwin responded positively to Alfred Russel Wallace's suggestion of using Spencer's new phrase \"survival of the fittest\" as an alternative to \"natural selection\", and adopted the phrase in \"The Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication\" published in 1868. In \"On the Origin of Species\", he introduced the phrase in the fifth edition published in 1869, intending it to mean \"better designed for an immediate, local environment\".\n\nWhile the phrase \"survival of the fittest” is often used to refer to “natural selection”, it is avoided by modern biologists, because the phrase can be misleading. For example, “survival” is only one aspect of selection, and not always the most important. Another problem is that the word “fit” is frequently confused with a state of physical fitness. In the evolutionary meaning “fitness” is the rate of reproductive output among a class of genetic variants.\n\nThe phrase can also be interpreted to express a theory or hypothesis: that \"fit\" as opposed to \"unfit\" individuals or species, in some sense of \"fit\", will survive some test.\n\nInterpretations of the phrase as expressing a theory are in danger of being tautological, meaning roughly \"those with a propensity to survive have a propensity to survive\"; to have content the theory must use a concept of fitness that is independent of that of survival.\n\nInterpreted as a theory of species survival, the theory that the fittest species survive is undermined by evidence that while direct competition is observed between individuals, populations and species, there is little evidence that competition has been the driving force in the evolution of large groups such as, for example, amphibians, reptiles, and mammals. Instead, these groups have evolved by expanding into empty ecological niches. In the punctuated equilibrium model of environmental and biological change, the factor determining survival is often not superiority over another in competition but ability to survive dramatic changes in environmental conditions, such as after a meteor impact energetic enough to greatly change the environment globally. The main land dwelling animals to survive the K-Pg impact 66 million years ago had the ability to live in underground tunnels, for example.\n\nIn 2010 Sahney et al. argued that there is little evidence that intrinsic, biological factors such as competition have been the driving force in the evolution of large groups. Instead, they cited extrinsic, abiotic factors such as expansion as the driving factor on a large evolutionary scale. The rise of dominant groups such as amphibians, reptiles, mammals and birds occurred by opportunistic expansion into empty ecological niches and the extinction of groups happened due to large shifts in the abiotic environment.\n\nIt has been claimed that \"the survival of the fittest\" theory in biology was interpreted by late 19th century capitalists as \"an ethical precept that sanctioned cut-throat economic competition\" and led to the advent of the theory of \"social Darwinism\" which was used to justify laissez-faire economics, war and racism. However, these ideas predate and commonly contradict Darwin's ideas, and indeed their proponents rarely invoked Darwin in support. The term \"social Darwinism\" referring to capitalist ideologies was introduced as a term of abuse by Richard Hofstadter's \"Social Darwinism in American Thought\" published in 1944.\n\nCritics of theories of evolution have argued that \"survival of the fittest\" provides a justification for behaviour that undermines moral standards by letting the strong set standards of justice to the detriment of the weak. However, any use of evolutionary descriptions to set moral standards would be a naturalistic fallacy (or more specifically the is–ought problem), as prescriptive moral statements cannot be derived from purely descriptive premises. Describing how things are does not imply that things ought to be that way. It is also suggested that \"survival of the fittest\" implies treating the weak badly, even though in some cases of good social behaviour – co-operating with others and treating them well – might improve evolutionary fitness.\n\nRussian anarchist Peter Kropotkin viewed the concept of \"survival of the fittest\" as supporting co-operation rather than competition. In his book \"\" he set out his analysis leading to the conclusion that the fittest was not necessarily the best at competing individually, but often the community made up of those best at working together. He concluded that In the animal world we have seen that the vast majority of species live in societies, and that they find in association the best arms for the struggle for life: understood, of course, in its wide Darwinian sense — not as a struggle for the sheer means of existence, but as a struggle against all natural conditions unfavourable to the species. The animal species, in which individual struggle has been reduced to its narrowest limits, and the practice of mutual aid has attained the greatest development, are invariably the most numerous, the most prosperous, and the most open to further progress.\n\nApplying this concept to human society, Kropotkin presented mutual aid as one of the dominant factors of evolution, the other being self-assertion, and concluded that In the practice of mutual aid, which we can retrace to the earliest beginnings of evolution, we thus find the positive and undoubted origin of our ethical conceptions; and we can affirm that in the ethical progress of man, mutual support not mutual struggle – has had the leading part. In its wide extension, even at the present time, we also see the best guarantee of a still loftier evolution of our race.\n\nHerbert Spencer first used the phrase – after reading Charles Darwin's \"On the Origin of Species\" – in his \"Principles of Biology\" of 1864 in which he drew parallels between his economic theories and Darwin's biological, evolutionary ones, writing, \"This survival of the fittest, which I have here sought to express in mechanical terms, is that which Mr. Darwin has called 'natural selection', or the preservation of favored races in the struggle for life.\"\n\nIn July 1866 Alfred Russel Wallace wrote to Darwin about readers thinking that the phrase \"natural selection\" personified nature as \"selecting\", and said this misconception could be avoided \"by adopting Spencer's term\" \"Survival of the fittest\". Darwin promptly replied that Wallace's letter was \"as clear as daylight. I fully agree with all that you say on the advantages of H. Spencer's excellent expression of 'the survival of the fittest'. This however had not occurred to me till reading your letter. It is, however, a great objection to this term that it cannot be used as a substantive governing a verb\". Had he received the letter two months earlier, he would have worked the phrase into the fourth edition of the \"Origin\" which was then being printed, and he would use it in his \"next book on Domestic Animals etc.\".\n\nDarwin wrote on page 6 of \"The Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication\" published in 1868, \"This preservation, during the battle for life, of varieties which possess any advantage in structure, constitution, or instinct, I have called Natural Selection; and Mr. Herbert Spencer has well expressed the same idea by the Survival of the Fittest. The term \"natural selection\" is in some respects a bad one, as it seems to imply conscious choice; but this will be disregarded after a little familiarity\". He defended his analogy as similar to language used in chemistry, and to astronomers depicting the \"attraction of gravity as ruling the movements of the planets\", or the way in which \"agriculturists speak of man making domestic races by his power of selection\". He had \"often personified the word Nature; for I have found it difficult to avoid this ambiguity; but I mean by nature only the aggregate action and product of many natural laws,—and by laws only the ascertained sequence of events.\"\n\nIn the first four editions of \"On the Origin of Species\", Darwin had used the phrase \"natural selection\". \nIn Chapter 4 of the 5th edition of \"The Origin\" published in 1869, Darwin implies again the synonym: \"Natural Selection, or the Survival of the Fittest\". By the word \"fittest\" Darwin meant \"better adapted for immediate, local environment\", not the common modern meaning of \"in the best physical shape\" (think of a puzzle piece, not an athlete). In the introduction he gave full credit to Spencer, writing \"I have called this principle, by which each slight variation, if useful, is preserved, by the term Natural Selection, in order to mark its relation to man's power of selection. But the expression often used by Mr. Herbert Spencer of the Survival of the Fittest is more accurate, and is sometimes equally convenient.\"\n\nIn \"The Man Versus The State\", Spencer used the phrase in a postscript to justify a plausible explanation of how his theories would not be adopted by \"societies of militant type\". He uses the term in the context of societies at war, and the form of his reference suggests that he is applying a general principle.\n\nThough Spencer’s conception of organic evolution is commonly interpreted as a form of Lamarckism, Herbert Spencer is sometimes credited with inaugurating Social Darwinism. The phrase \"survival of the fittest\" has become widely used in popular literature as a catchphrase for any topic related or analogous to evolution and natural selection. It has thus been applied to principles of unrestrained competition, and it has been used extensively by both proponents and opponents of Social Darwinism.\n\nEvolutionary biologists criticise the manner in which the term is used by non-scientists and the connotations that have grown around the term in popular culture. The phrase also does not help in conveying the complex nature of natural selection, so modern biologists prefer and almost exclusively use the term natural selection. The biological concept of fitness refers to reproductive success, as opposed to survival, and is not explicit in the specific ways in which organisms can be more \"fit\" (increase reproductive success) as having phenotypic characteristics that enhance survival and reproduction (which was the meaning that Spencer had in mind).\n\n\"Survival of the fittest\" is sometimes claimed to be a tautology. The reasoning is that if one takes the term \"fit\" to mean \"endowed with phenotypic characteristics which improve chances of survival and reproduction\" (which is roughly how Spencer understood it), then \"survival of the fittest\" can simply be rewritten as \"survival of those who are better equipped for surviving\". Furthermore, the expression \"does\" become a tautology if one uses the most widely accepted definition of \"fitness\" in modern biology, namely reproductive success itself (rather than any set of characters conducive to this reproductive success). This reasoning is sometimes used to claim that Darwin's entire theory of evolution by natural selection is fundamentally tautological, and therefore devoid of any explanatory power.\n\nHowever, the expression \"survival of the fittest\" (taken on its own and out of context) gives a very incomplete account of the mechanism of natural selection. The reason is that it does not mention a key requirement for natural selection, namely the requirement of \"heritability\". It is true that the phrase \"survival of the fittest\", in and by itself, is a tautology if fitness is defined by survival and reproduction. Natural selection is the portion of variation in reproductive success that is caused by \"heritable\" characters (see the article on natural selection).\n\nIf certain heritable characters increase or decrease the chances of survival and reproduction of their bearers, then it follows mechanically (by definition of \"heritable\") that those characters that improve survival and reproduction will increase in frequency over generations. This is precisely what is called \"evolution by natural selection.\" On the other hand, if the characters which lead to differential reproductive success are not heritable, then no meaningful evolution will occur, \"survival of the fittest\" or not: if improvement in reproductive success is caused by traits that are not heritable, then there is no reason why these traits should increase in frequency over generations. In other words, natural selection does not simply state that \"survivors survive\" or \"reproducers reproduce\"; rather, it states that \"survivors survive, reproduce and \"therefore\" propagate any \"heritable\" characters which have affected their survival and reproductive success\". This statement is not tautological: it hinges on the testable hypothesis that such fitness-impacting heritable variations actually exist (a hypothesis that has been amply confirmed.)\n\nMomme von Sydow suggested further definitions of 'survival of the fittest' that may yield a testable meaning in biology and also in other areas where Darwinian processes have been influential. However, much care would be needed to disentangle tautological from testable aspects. Moreover, an \"implicit shifting between a testable and an untestable interpretation can be an illicit tactic to immunize natural selection [...] while conveying the impression that one is concerned with testable hypotheses.\"\n\nSkeptic Society founder and \"Skeptic\" magazine publisher Michael Shermer addresses the tautology problem in his 1997 book, \"Why People Believe Weird Things\", in which he points out that although tautologies are sometimes the beginning of science, they are never the end, and that scientific principles like natural selection are testable and falsifiable by virtue of their predictive power. Shermer points out, as an example, that population genetics accurately demonstrate when natural selection will and will not effect change on a population. Shermer hypothesizes that if hominid fossils were found in the same geological strata as trilobites, it would be evidence against natural selection.\n\n\n\n\n", "id": "627964", "title": "Survival of the fittest"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12327097", "text": "The Complete Works of Charles Darwin Online\n\nThe Complete Work of Charles Darwin Online (or Darwin Online) is a freely-accessible website containing the complete print and manuscript works of Charles Darwin, as well as related supplementary material.\n\nDarwin Online is a research project and website based at the National University of Singapore. It aims to provide all available print and manuscript material except unpublished letters, which are being made available separately by the Darwin Correspondence Project. In addition Darwin Online includes the largest bibliographical list of Darwin's publications and the largest union catalogue of Darwin papers and manuscripts worldwide. The site also provides an extensive collection of related materials such as reviews of Darwin's books, descriptions of his Beagle specimens, obituaries and recollections and works cited or read by Darwin. There is also general history and commentary—some from published sources and some prepared for the project. \n\nThe project began in 2002 and first produced a pilot website, \"The writings of Charles Darwin on the web\", replaced in October 2006 by the new website. The launch was widely reported, and the project has been widely reviewed by professional publications in biology, and librarianship.\n\nThe site contains at least one copy of all known Darwin publications, both as searchable text (98,000 pages) and full colour images (80,000 images). Most of this material was not previously available on the internet – or never even reproduced in any form. New items are still being found and added, along with further editions, translations and transcriptions of Darwin's handwritten papers. \nIn April 2008 Darwin's private papers were launched. The event marked the largest release of new materials by and about Darwin ever published. The collection covers c. 20,000 items across c. 90,000 electronic images. One notable item is the Diary of Emma Darwin (1808–1896), Darwin's wife.\n\nThe site is accessible open access free of charge. It is copyright, with permission for non-commercial use.\n\nThe project was privately funded by the founder and Director, John van Wyhe, from 2002-5. From 2005-8 the project was sponsored by the United Kingdom Arts and Humanities Research Council. The principal grantees John van Wyhe of Christ's College. University of Cambridge is Director of the project; James Secord of the Department of History and Philosophy of Science, University of Cambridge and Janet Browne of the Wellcome Trust Centre for the History of Medicine, University College London were the principal investigators for the grant. The project is now supported by private donation.\n\n", "id": "12327097", "title": "The Complete Works of Charles Darwin Online"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19191080", "text": "Probabilistic prognosis\n\nProbabilistic prognosis means the anticipation of future events based on a probabilistic structure of past experiences of individual and present situations. Past experiences and present situations help to create hypothesis about the forthcoming future and attributes certain probabilities to them. According to probabilistic prognosis, the preparation of an individual occurs to corresponding actions.\n\nThis ability is the result of biological evolution in a probabilistically organized environment. The prognosis of living creatures optimizes the results of their actions, and therefore they are adequate, exactly to those variable characteristics of environment on which the success of action – satisfaction of needs, achieving goals, depends on.\n\nUnder some pathological conditions, such as schizophrenia, local damage of the brain, the probabilistic prognosis mechanism can be disturbed. The theory of probabilistic prognosis originated as a continuation of Nikolai Bernstein’s ideas stated in his work “Essays of the Physiology of Movement and Physiology of Activity” (1966)\nA new direction of studies of probabilistic prognosis started with works of Professor J.Feigenberg(1969), Professor M.Tsiskaridze (1969), and Preofessor V.Ivannikov(1971), and later were widely explored by other scientists. Studies of probabilistic prognosis remain topical until now and have many followers.\n\n", "id": "19191080", "title": "Probabilistic prognosis"}
