[{"url":"https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52914225","text":"Sharp INTELLOS automated unmanned ground vehicle (A-UGV)\n\nSharp INTELLOS automated unmanned ground vehicle (A-UGV) is a type of robotics system in the category called Automated unmanned ground vehicle (A-UGV) known for using a navigation surveillance platform developed by Sharp. The system combines automation, mobility and a variety of monitoring and detection capabilities to extend the impact of a traditional security force.\nIn Greek mythology, a giant man of bronze, known as either Talos or Talon, circled Crete's shores three times daily, protecting Europa from pirates and invaders. \"INTELLOS\" combines the concept of intelligence with both technology and security.\n\nThe product launched at the ASIS International 62nd Annual Seminar and Exhibits (ASIS 2016) in Orlando, Florida on September 12, 2016. \nThe Sharp INTELLOS A-UGV provides data that can enhance outdoor surveillance, security, safety, and maintenance inspections. The system offers those services through a durable cost-effective multi-terrain, mobile sensor platform that can capture video, audio and environmental data. Robots generally work best at repetitive tasks (tedious to humans). This type of automated robot is ideal for dull, dirty, and/or dangerous outdoor patrols, which may be unsafe or unsuitable for existing field personnel.\nRobots can serve to extend the capacity and reach of traditional guarding, by integrating with existing security infrastructures and using technology to help lower security operating costs for routine tasks. They can also be tied into current networks and systems, extending their capabilities, while avoiding incremental implementation costs.\n\nOrganizations may have areas around their property that are not covered by cameras or foot patrols. These vehicles monitor, record, and provide visual surveillance in and between these uncovered areas. \n\nAutomated unmanned ground vehicles can be used for video investigation missions. Optional mobile sensors can gather information around a property to be analyzed and reviewed by personnel. These robots follow predetermined or changeable routes within fenced areas and can be used to inspect for industries, such as public utilities, refineries and storage yards. They can navigate patrol paths, along waypoints, recording and securely transmitting to security personnel allowing them to decide when human inspection or intervention is necessary.\n\nThe Sharp INTELLOS A-UGV can also provide a visible deterrent, while helping to protect people, infrastructure and assets. The vehicle has a ruggedized design intended to withstand variations in temperature and terrains.\n\nThe propulsion (drive) system is powered by two lithium ION battery packs. The vehicle can operate on either one or two battery packs. These batteries are housed in user-replaceable cartridges that can be charged in an off-line charger.\n\nThe Sharp INTELLOS A-UGV has standard cameras and an optional thermal camera. The FLIR Thermal camera, which is mounted atop the Sharp INTELLOS A-UGV's adjustable-height boom, illuminates objects in environments without any ambient light, enabling nighttime surveillance as well as showing differences in temperature. The integrated FLIR Thermal camera helps personnel detect human, vehicular, and animal intrusions, which can be viewed and recorded with the AXIS P56 PTZ dome network series camera.\n\nThe Intellos is designed to carry optional MultiRAE gas and radiation sensors as well as a siren, flashing lights and voice announcements (including two-way communications). Its video, audio and optional sensor signals are transmitted by wireless mesh network or cellular network. Other functions include a PC/Server with preinstalled command and control software, navigation system using GPS (Global Positioning System) and RTK (Real Time Kinematic) to provide accurate positioning.\n\nThe Sharp INTELLOS CCAP (Command and Control Application Software) PC/Server is located in the Security Command Center and is used to control and monitor the vehicles patrol path operations. The software allows an authorized administrator to create and schedule patrols as well as determine waypoint actions to undertake. These actions include the activation of sensors at the appropriate time and location.\n\nIn the case of cellular, the unit includes a communication router that can automatically switch between the wireless network to cellular as a fail over in the event a wireless signal cannot be acquired. Transition to cellular requires a data plan on a public carrier's cellular network.\n\nSharp INTELLOS A-UGV was named one of the Top 30 Technology Innovations of 2016 by Security Sales & Integration and in 2017 INTELLOS was named the winner of the Law Enforcement / Guarding Systems category of the Security Industry Associaton's New Product Showcase.\n\nA U.S. federal trademark registration was filed for \"INTELLOS\" by Sharp Corporation. The United States Patent and Trademark Office has given the \"INTELLOS\" trademark serial number 86886871.\n\n","id":"52914225","title":"Sharp INTELLOS automated unmanned ground vehicle (A-UGV)"}]
