[{"url":"https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34846522","text":"Ivar Mendez\n\nIvar Mendez, M.D., PhD, is the Fred H. Wigmore Professor and Chairman of Surgery at the University of Saskatchewan and the Unified Head of Surgery for the Province of Saskatchewan. He is internationally known for his work in cell transplantation for Parkinson's disease and the use of remote presence robotics in neurosurgery and primary health care.\n\nHe also holds an appointment at the Department of Psychology and Neuroscience at Dalhousie University and he is one of the founders of the Brain Repair Centre. He is also the president and founder of the Ivar Mendez International Foundation that is dedicated to providing health and educational assistance to children in the Bolivian Andes. Mendez is a photographer and sculptor and has published 4 books of photography.\n\nMendez was born in La Paz, Bolivia and immigrated with his family to Canada as a teenager. He obtained a BSc degree from the University of Toronto and then an M.D. from the University of Western Ontario (UWO). He did a neurosurgical residency training in London, and was certified in Neurosurgery from the Royal College of Physician and Surgeons of Canada in 1994 and from the American Board of Neurological Surgery in 1996. He became a fellow of the American College of Surgeons in 1998 and became a member of the College Board of Governors in 2015. His interest in regenerative medicine led him to obtain a PhD in Anatomy and Neurobiology from the UWO his PhD thesis was on “Neurotransmitter Interactions in Nigral Grafts”. He did a postdoctoral fellowship at the University of Lund in Sweden under the supervision of Anders Björklund, considered the “father” of cell transplantation in Parkinson's disease. In 2014, Saint Mary's University (Halifax) in Nova Scotia awarded Mendez a Doctor of Science (honoris causa) degree for his contribution to Neuroscience and he was inducted a Fellow to the Canadian Academy of Health Sciences. In 2016, Dr. Mendez received the Government of Canada Public Service Award of Excellence for the use of remote presence robotic technology to improve healthcare in the Canadian North.\n\nHe pioneered the technique of multiple grafts to restore dopamine input to the parkinsonian mammalian brain. This technique was translated into clinical trials in patients with Parkinson's disease and showed long-term survival of those grafts. He also pioneered the use of Glial Derived Neurotrophic Factor (GDNF) in combination with fetal cells in humans. Mendez invented a transplantation delivery system to inject cells into the human brain. With his team, he performed the first long-distance brain surgery robotic telementoring in the world by using a robotic arm to mentor neurosurgeons located 400 km away.\nIn 2015, Mendez and his team printed the first 3D brain for planning deep brain stimulation surgery. Research in 3D brain printing led in 2016 to the development of a virtual reality (VR) brain for medical education and surgical planning applications.\n\n\nMendez has established a Canadian charitable organization, the Ivar Mendez International Foundation, to provide nutrition, dental care and art program to children in remote locations of the Bolivian Andes.\n\n\nHe has published 4 books of photography and has had several exhibitions of his photography and sculpture \n\n\n","id":"34846522","title":"Ivar Mendez"}]
