{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21402573", "text": "Eidetic memory\n\nEidetic memory (; sometimes called photographic memory) is an ability to vividly recall images from memory after only a few instances of exposure, with high precision for a brief time after exposure, without using a mnemonic device. Although the terms \"eidetic memory\" and \"photographic memory\" are popularly used interchangeably, they are also distinguished, with eidetic memory referring to the ability to view memories like photographs for a few minutes, and photographic memory referring to the ability to recall pages of text or numbers, or similar, in great detail. When the concepts are distinguished, eidetic memory is reported to occur in a small number of children and as something generally not found in adults, while true photographic memory has never been demonstrated to exist.\n\nThe word \"eidetic\" comes from the Greek word εἶδος (, \"eidos\", \"seen\").\n\nThe terms \"eidetic memory\" and \"photographic memory\" are commonly used interchangeably, but they are also distinguished. Scholar Annette Kujawski Taylor stated, \"In eidetic memory, a person has an almost faithful mental image snapshot or photograph of an event in their memory. However, eidetic memory is not limited to visual aspects of memory and includes auditory memories as well as various sensory aspects across a range of stimuli associated with a visual image.\" Author Andrew Hudmon commented: \"Examples of people with a photographic-like memory are rare. Eidetic imagery is the ability to remember an image in so much detail, clarity, and accuracy that it is as though the image were still being perceived. It is not perfect, as it is subject to distortions and additions (like episodic memory), and vocalization interferes with the memory.\"\n\n\"Eidetikers\", as those who possess this ability are called, report a vivid afterimage that lingers in the visual field with their eyes appearing to scan across the image as it is described. Contrary to ordinary mental imagery, eidetic images are externally projected, experienced as \"out there\" rather than in the mind. Vividness and stability of the image begins to fade within minutes after the removal of the visual stimulus. Lilienfeld et al. stated, \"People with eidetic memory can supposedly hold a visual image in their mind with such clarity that they can describe it perfectly or almost perfectly [...], just as we can describe the details of a painting immediately in front of us with near perfect accuracy.\"\n\nBy contrast, photographic memory may be defined as the ability to recall pages of text, numbers, or similar, in great detail, without the visualization that comes with eidetic memory. It may be described as the ability to briefly look at a page of information and then recite it perfectly from memory. This type of ability has never been proven to exist and is considered popular myth.\n\nEidetic memory is typically found only in young children, as it is virtually nonexistent in adults. Hudmon stated, \"Children possess far more capacity for eidetic imagery than adults, suggesting that a developmental change (such as acquiring language skills) may disrupt the potential for eidetic imagery.\" Eidetic memory has been found in 2 to 10 percent of children aged 6 to 12. It has been hypothesized that language acquisition and verbal skills allow older children to think more abstractly and thus rely less on visual memory systems. Extensive research has failed to demonstrate consistent correlations between the presence of eidetic imagery and any cognitive, intellectual, neurological or emotional measure.\n\nA few adults have had phenomenal memories (not necessarily of images), but their abilities are also unconnected with their intelligence levels and tend to be highly specialized. In extreme cases, like those of Solomon Shereshevsky and Kim Peek, memory skills can reportedly hinder social skills. Shereshevsky was a trained mnemonist, not an eidetic memoriser, and there are no studies that confirm whether Kim Peek had true eidetic memory.\n\nAccording to Herman Goldstine, the mathematician John von Neumann was able to recall from memory every book he had ever read.\n\nScientific skepticism about the existence of eidetic memory was fueled around 1970 by Charles Stromeyer, who studied his future wife, Elizabeth, who claimed that she could recall poetry written in a foreign language that she did not understand years after she had first seen the poem. She also could, apparently, recall random dot patterns with such fidelity as to combine two patterns into a stereoscopic image. She remains the only person documented to have passed such a test. However, the methods used in the testing procedures could be considered questionable, (especially given the extraordinary nature of the claims being made) as is the fact that the researcher married his subject. Additionally, that the tests have never been repeated (Elizabeth has consistently refused to repeat them) raises further concerns.\n\nLilienfeld et al. stated, \"Some psychologists believe that eidetic memory reflects an unusually long persistence of the iconic image in some lucky people.\" They added: \"More recent evidence raises questions about whether any memories are truly photographic (Rothen, Meier & Ward, 2012). Eidetikers' memories are clearly remarkable, but they are rarely perfect. Their memories often contain minor errors, including information that was not present in the original visual stimulus. So even eidetic memory often appears to be reconstructive.\"\n\nThe American cognitive scientist Marvin Minsky, in his book \"The Society of Mind\" (1988), considered reports of photographic memory to be an \"unfounded myth.\" Furthermore, there is \"no\" scientific consensus regarding the nature, the proper definition, or even the very existence of eidetic imagery, even in children.\n\nScientific skeptic author Brian Dunning reviewed the literature on the subject of both eidetic and photographic memory in 2016 and concluded that there is \"a lack of compelling evidence that eidetic memory exists at all among healthy adults, and no evidence that photographic memory exists. But there's a common theme running through many of these research papers, and that's that the difference between ordinary memory and exceptional memory appears to be one of degree.\"\n\nTo constitute photographic or eidetic memory, the visual recall must persist without the use of mnemonics, expert talent, or other cognitive strategies. Various cases have been reported that rely on such skills and are erroneously attributed to photographic memory.\n\nAn example of extraordinary memory abilities being ascribed to eidetic memory comes from the popular interpretations of Adriaan de Groot's classic experiments into the ability of chess grandmasters to memorize complex positions of chess pieces on a chess board. Initially, it was found that these experts could recall surprising amounts of information, far more than nonexperts, suggesting eidetic skills. However, when the experts were presented with arrangements of chess pieces that could never occur in a game, their recall was no better than the nonexperts, suggesting that they had developed an ability to organize certain types of information, rather than possessing innate eidetic ability.\n\nIndividuals identified as having a condition known as hyperthymesia are able to remember very intricate details of their own personal lives, but the ability seems not to extend to other, non-autobiographical information. They may have vivid recollections such as who they were with, what they were wearing, and how they were feeling on a specific date many years in the past. Patients under study, such as Jill Price, show brain scans that resemble those with obsessive–compulsive disorder. In fact, Price's unusual autobiographical memory has been attributed as a byproduct of compulsively making journal and diary entries. Hyperthymestic patients may additionally suffer from depression stemming from the inability to forget unpleasant memories and experiences from the past. It is a misconception that hyperthymesia suggests any eidetic ability.\n\nEach year at the World Memory Championships, the world's best memorizers compete for prizes. None of the world's best competitive memorizers has a photographic memory, and no one with claimed eidetic or photographic memory has ever won the championship.\n\nWith the questionable exception of Elizabeth Stromeyer, a 2006 article in \"Slate\" magazine claimed that, of the people rigorously scientifically tested, no one claiming to have long-term eidetic memory had this ability proven. There are a number of individuals whose extraordinary memory has been labeled \"eidetic\", but many use mnemonics and other, non-eidetic memory-enhancing exercises. Others have not been thoroughly tested.\n\n\n", "id": "21402573", "title": "Eidetic memory"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6795380", "text": "Thought suppression\n\nThought suppression is when an individual consciously attempts to stop thinking about a particular thought. It is often associated with obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD). OCD is when a person will repeatedly (usually unsuccessfully) attempt to prevent or \"neutralize\" intrusive distressing thoughts centered on one or more obsessions. It is also related to work on memory inhibition. Thought suppression is relevant to both mental and behavioral levels, possibly leading to ironic effects that are contrary to intention.\n\nWhen an individual tries to suppress thoughts under a high cognitive load, the frequency of those thoughts increases and becomes more accessible than before. Evidence shows that people can prevent their thoughts from being translated into behavior when self-monitoring is high; this does not apply to automatic behaviors though, and may result in latent, unconscious actions. This phenomenon is made paradoxically worse by increasing the amount of distractions a person has, although the experiments in this area can be criticized for using impersonal concurrent tasks, which may or may not properly reflect natural processes or individual differences. Ironic process theory is one cognitive model that can explain the paradoxical effect seen above. However, given the mixed evidence and commensurate with the latest research, it is suggested that such a model needs to account for individual differences. It should also note possible neurological dynamics (see, for instance, obsessive–compulsive disorder), to be considered robust.\n\nIn order for thought suppression and its effectiveness to be studied, researchers have had to find methods of recording the processes going on in the mind. One experiment designed with this purpose was performed by Wegner, Schneider, Carter & White. They asked participants to avoid thinking of a specific target (e.g. a white bear) for five minutes, but if they did, they were told then to ring a bell. After this, participants were told that for the next five minutes they were to think about the target. There was evidence that unwanted thoughts occurred more frequently in those who used thought suppression compared to those who were not. Furthermore, there was also evidence that during the second stage, those who had used thought suppression had a higher frequency of target thoughts than did those who hadn't used thought suppression; later coined the rebound effect. This effect has been replicated and can even be done with implausible targets, such as the thought of a \"green rabbit\". From these implications, Wegner eventually developed the \"ironic process theory\".\n\nTo better elucidate the findings of thought suppression, several studies have changed the target thought. Roemer and Borkovec found that participants who suppressed anxious or depressing thoughts showed a significant rebound effect. Furthermore, Wenzlaff, Wegner, & Roper demonstrated that anxious or depressed subjects were less likely to suppress negative, unwanted thoughts. Despite Rassin, Merkelbach and Muris reporting that this finding is moderately robust in the literature, some studies were unable to replicate results. However, this may be explained by a consideration of individual differences.\n\nRecent research by Geraerts, Merckelbach, Jelicic, & Smeets (2006) found that for individuals with low anxiety and high desirability traits (repressors), suppressed anxious autobiographical events initially intruded fewer times than in other groups (low, high, and high defensive anxious groups), but intruded more often after one week. This difference in coping style may account for the disparities within the literature. That said, the problem remains that the cause of the paradoxical effect may be in the thought tapping measures used (e.g. bell ringing). Evidence from Brown (1990) that showed participants were very sensitive to frequency information prompted Clarke, Ball and Pape (1991) to obtain participants' aposterio estimates of the number of intrusive target thoughts and found the same pattern of paradoxical results. However, even though such a method appears to overcome the problem, it and all the other methodologies use self-report as the primary form of data-collection. This may be problematic because of response distortion or inaccuracy in self-reporting.\n\nThought suppression also has the capability to change our behavior. Macrae, Bodenhausen, Milne, and Jetten found that when people were asked not to think about the stereotypes of a certain group (e.g. a \"skinhead\"), their written descriptions about a group member's typical day contained less stereotypical thoughts. However, when they were told they were going to meet an individual they had just written about, those in the suppression group sat significantly farther away from the \"skinhead\" (just by virtue of his clothes being present). These results show that even though there may have been an initial enhancement of the stereotype, participants were able to prevent this from being communicated in their writing; this was not true for their behavior though.\n\nFurther experiments have documented similar findings. In one study, when participants were given cognitively demanding concurrent tasks, the results showed a paradoxical higher frequency of target thoughts than controls. However other controlled studies have not shown such effects. For example, Wenzlaff and Bates found that subjects concentrating on a positive task experienced neither paradoxical effects nor rebound effects—even when challenged with cognitive load. Wenzlaff and Bates also note that the beneficiality of concentration in their study participants was better optimized when the subjects employed positive thoughts.\n\nSome studies have shown that when test subjects are under what Wegner refers to as a \"cognitive load\" (for instance, using multiple external distractions to try to suppress a target thought), the effectiveness of thought suppression appears to be reduced. However, in other studies in which focused distraction is used, long term effectiveness may improve. That is, successful suppression may involve less distractors. For example, Wegner, Schneider, Carter & White found that a single, pre-determined distracter (e.g., a red Volkswagen) was sufficient to eliminate the paradoxical effect \"post-testing\". Evidence from Bowers and Woody is supportive of the finding that hypnotized individuals produce no paradoxical effects. This rests on the assumption that deliberate \"distracter activity\" is bypassed in such an activity.\n\nWhen the cognitive load is increased, thought suppression typically becomes less effective. For example, in the white bear experiment, many general distractions in the environment (for instance a lamp, a light bulb, a desk etc.) might later serve as reminders of the object being suppressed (these are also referred to as \"free distraction\"). Some studies, however, are unable to find this effect for emotional thoughts in hypnotized individuals when one focused distraction is provided. In an attempt to account for these findings, a number of theorists have produced cognitive models of thought suppression. Wegner suggests that individuals distract themselves using environmental items. Later, these items become retrieval cues for the thought attempting to be suppressed (i.e. \"environmental cueing theory\"). This iterative process leaves the individual surrounded by retrieval cues, ultimately causing the rebound effect. Wegner hypothesizes that multiple retrieval cues not being forged explains, in part, the effectiveness of focused distraction (i.e., a reduction of mental load). This is because there may be an ideal balance between the two processes; if the cognitive demand that isn't too heavy, then the monitoring processes won't supersede it.\n\nIndividual differences may also play a role in regards to the ironic thought process.\n\nRecently, thought suppression has been seen as a form of \"experiential avoidance\". Experiential avoidance is when an individual attempts to suppress, change, or control unwanted internal experiences (thoughts, feelings, bodily sensations, memories, etc.). This line of thinking supports relational frame theory.\n\nDreams occur mainly during the rapid eye movement (REM) sleep and are composed of images, ideas, emotions, and sensations. Although more research needs to be done on this subject, dreams are said to be linked to the unconscious mind. Thought suppression has an influence on the subject matter of the unconscious mind and by trying to restrain particular thoughts, there is a high chance of them showing up in one's dreams.\n\nIronic control theory, also known as \"ironic process theory\", states that thought suppression \"leads to an increased occurrence of the suppressed content in waking states\". The irony lies in the fact that although people try not to think about a particular subject, there is a high probability that it will appear in one's dreams regardless. There is a difference for individuals who have a higher tendency of suppression; they are more prone to psychopathological responses such as \"intrusive thoughts, including depression, anxiety and obsessional thinking\". Due to these individuals having higher instances of thought suppression, they experience dream rebound more often.\nCognitive load also plays a role in ironic control theory. Studies have shown that a greater cognitive load results in an increased possibility of dream rebound occurring. In other words, when one tries to retain a heavy load of information before going to sleep, there is a high chance of that information manifesting itself within the dream. There is a greater degree of dream rebound in those with a higher cognitive load opposed to those whose load was absent. With the enhancement of a high cognitive load, ironic control theory states thought suppression is more likely to occur and lead to dream rebound.\n\nDream rebound is when suppressed thoughts manifest themselves in one's dreams. Self-control is a form of thought suppression and when one dreams, that suppressed item has a higher chance of appearing in the dream. For example, when an individual is attempting to quit smoking, they may dream about themselves smoking a cigarette. Emotion suppression has also been found to trigger dream rebound. Recurrence of emotional experiences act as presleep suggestions, ultimately leading to the suppressed thoughts presenting themselves within the dream. One effecting factor of dream rebound is the changes in the prefrontal lobes during rapid-eye movement sleep. Suppressed thoughts are more accessible during REM sleep, as a result of operating processes having a diminished effectiveness. This leads to presleep thoughts becoming more available \"with an increased activity of searching for these suppressed thought[s]\". There are other hypotheses regarding REM sleep and dream rebound. For instance, weak semantic associations, post REM sleep, are more accessible than any other time due to weak ironic monitoring processes becoming stronger. More research is needed to further understand what exactly causes dream rebound.\n\n\n", "id": "6795380", "title": "Thought suppression"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53975739", "text": "Next-in-line effect\n\nThe next-in-line effect is the phenomena of people being unable to recall information concerning events immediately preceding their turn to perform.\n\nThe effect was first studied experimentally by Malcolm Brenner in 1973. In his experiment the participants were each in turn reading a word aloud from an index card, and after 25 words were asked to recall as many of all the read words as possible. The results of the experiment showed that words read aloud within approximately nine seconds before the subject's own turn were recalled worse than other words.\n\nThe reason for the next-in-line effect appears to be a deficit in encoding the perceived information preceding a performance. That is, the information is never stored to long-term memory and thus cannot be retrieved later after the performance. One finding supporting this theory is that asking the subjects beforehand to pay more attention to events preceding their turn to perform can prevent the memory deficit and even result in overcompensation, making people remember the events before their turn better than others.\n\nIn addition, the appearance of the next-in-line effect does not seem to be connected to the level of fear of negative evaluation. Both people with lower and higher anxiety levels are subject to the memory deficit.\n", "id": "53975739", "title": "Next-in-line effect"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3791822", "text": "Subvocal recognition\n\nSubvocal recognition (SVR) is the process of taking subvocalization and converting the detected results to a digital output aurally or text-based. \n\nA set of electrodes are attached to the skin of the throat and, without opening the mouth or uttering a sound, the words are recognized by a computer.\n\nSubvocal speech recognition deals with electromyograms that are different for each speaker. Therefore, consistency can be thrown off just by the positioning of an electrode. To improve accuracy, researchers in this field are relying on statistical models that get better at pattern-matching the more times a subject \"speaks\" through the electrodes, but even then there are lapses. At Carnegie Mellon University, researchers found that the same \"speaker\" with accuracy rates of 94% one day can see that rate drop to 48% a day later; between two different speakers it drops even more.\n\nRelevant applications for this technology where audible speech is impossible: for astronauts, underwater Navy Seals, fighter pilots and emergency workers charging into loud, harsh environments. At Worcester Polytechnic Institute in Massachusetts, research is underway to use subvocal information as a control source for computer music instruments.\n\nWith a grant from the U.S. Army, research into synthetic telepathy using subvocalization is taking place at the University of California, Irvine under lead scientist Mike D'Zmura.\n\nNASA's Ames Research Laboratory in Mountain View, California, under the supervision of Charles Jorgensen is conducting subvocalization research.\n\nThe Brain Computer Interface R&D program at Wadsworth Center under the New York State department of health has confirmed the existing ability to decipher consonants and vowels from imagined speech, which allows for brain-based communication using imagined speech.\n\nUS Patents on silent communication technologies include: US Patent 6587729 \"Apparatus for audibly communicating speech using the radio frequency hearing effect\", US Patent 5159703 \"Silent subliminal presentation system\", US Patent 6011991 \"Communication system and method including brain wave analysis and/or use of brain activity\", US Patent 3951134 \"Apparatus and method for remotely monitoring and altering brain waves\".\n\n\n\n\n", "id": "3791822", "title": "Subvocal recognition"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21312297", "text": "Memory consolidation\n\nMemory consolidation is a category of processes that stabilize a memory trace after its initial acquisition. Consolidation is distinguished into two specific processes, synaptic consolidation, which is synonymous with late-phase long-term potentiation and occurs within the first few hours after learning, and systems consolidation, where hippocampus-dependent memories become independent of the hippocampus over a period of weeks to years. Recently, a third process has become the focus of research, reconsolidation, in which previously-consolidated memories can be made labile again through reactivation of the memory trace.\nMemory consolidation was first referred to in the writings of the renowned Roman teacher of rhetoric Quintillian. He noted the \"curious fact… that the interval of a single night will greatly increase the strength of the memory,\" and presented the possibility that \"… the power of recollection .. undergoes a process of ripening and maturing during the time which intervenes.\" The process of consolidation was later proposed based on clinical data illustrated in 1882 by Ribot’s Law of Regression, \"progressive destruction advances progressively from the unstable to the stable\". This idea was elaborated on by William H. Burnham a few years later in a paper on amnesia integrating findings from experimental psychology and neurology. Coining of the term \"consolidation\" is credited to the German researchers Müller and Alfons Pilzecker who rediscovered the concept that memory takes time to fixate or undergo \"Konsolidierung\" in their studies conducted between 1892 and 1900. The two proposed the perseveration-consolidation hypothesis after they found that new information learned could disrupt information previously learnt if not enough time had passed to allow the old information to be consolidated. This led to the suggestion that new memories are fragile in nature but as time passes they become solidified.\n\nSystematic studies of anterograde amnesia started to emerge in the 1960s and 1970s. The case of Henry Molaison, formerly known as patient H.M., became a landmark in studies of memory as it relates to amnesia and the removal of the hippocampal zone and sparked massive interest in the study of brain lesions and their effect on memory. After Molaison underwent a bilateral medial temporal lobe resection to alleviate epileptic symptoms the patient began to suffer from memory impairments. Molaison lost the ability to encode and consolidate newly learned information leading researchers to conclude the medial temporal lobe (MTL) was an important structure involved in this process. Molaison also showed signs of retrograde amnesia spanning a period of about 3 years prior to the surgery suggesting that recently acquired memories of as long as a couple years could remain in the MTL prior to consolidation into other brain areas. Research into other patients with resections of the MTL have shown a positive relationship between the degree of memory impairment and the extent of MTL removal which points to a temporal gradient in the consolidating nature of the MTL.\n\nThese studies were accompanied by the creation of animal models of human amnesia in an effort to identify brain substrates critical for slow consolidation. Meanwhile, neuropharmacological studies of selected brain areas began to shed light on the molecules possibly responsible for fast consolidation. In recent decades, advancements in cellular preparations, molecular biology, and neurogenetics have revolutionized the study of consolidation. Providing additional support is the study of functional brain activity in humans which has revealed that the activity of brain regions changes over time after a new memory is acquired. This change can occur as quickly as a couple hours after the memory has been encoded suggesting that there is a temporal dimension to the reorganization of the memory as it is represented in the brain.\n\nSynaptic consolidation, or late-phase LTP, is one form of memory consolidation seen across all species and long-term memory tasks. Long-term memory, when discussed in the context of synaptic consolidation, is memory that lasts for at least 24 hours. An exception to this 24-hour rule is long-term potentiation, or LTP, a model of synaptic plasticity related to learning, in which an hour is thought to be sufficient. Synaptic consolidation is achieved faster than systems consolidation, within only minutes to hours of learning in goldfish. LTP, one of the best understood forms of synaptic plasticity, is thought to be a possible underlying process in synaptic consolidation.\n\nThe standard model of synaptic consolidation suggests that alterations of synaptic protein synthesis and changes in membrane potential are achieved through activating intracellular transduction cascades. These molecular cascades trigger transcription factors that lead to changes in gene expression. The result of the gene expression is the lasting alteration of synaptic proteins, as well as synaptic remodeling and growth. In a short time-frame immediately following learning, the molecular cascade, expression and process of both transcription factors and immediate early genes, are susceptible to disruptions. Disruptions caused by specific drugs, antibodies and gross physical trauma can block the effects of synaptic consolidation.\n\nLTP can be thought of as the prolonged strengthening of synaptic transmission, and is known to produce increases in the neurotransmitter production and receptor sensitivity, lasting minutes to even days. The process of LTP is regarded as a contributing factor to synaptic plasticity and in the growth of synaptic strength, which are suggested to underlie memory formation. LTP is also considered to be an important mechanism in terms of maintaining memories within brain regions, and therefore is thought to be involved in learning. There is compelling evidence that LTP is critical for Pavlovian fear conditioning in rats suggesting that it mediates learning and memory in mammals. Specifically, NMDA-receptor antagonists appear to block the induction of both LTP and fear conditioning and that fear conditioning increases amygdaloidal synaptic transmission that would result in LTP.\n\nSynaptic consolidation, when compared to systems consolidation (which is said to take weeks to months to years to be accomplished), is considerably faster. There is evidence to suggest that synaptic consolidation takes place within minutes to hours of memory encoding or learning, and as such is considered the ‘fast’ type of consolidation. As soon as six hours after training, memories become impervious to interferences that disrupt synaptic consolidation and the formation of long-term memory.\n\nDistributed learning has been found to enhance memory consolidation, specifically for relational memory. Experimental results suggest that distributing learning over the course of 24 hours decreases the rate of forgetting compared to massed learning, and enhances relational memory consolidation. When interpreted in the context of synaptic consolidation, mechanisms of synaptic strengthening may depend on the spacing of memory reactivation to allow sufficient time for protein synthesis to occur, and thereby strengthen long-term memory.\n\nProtein synthesis plays an important role in the formation of new memories. Studies have shown that protein synthesis inhibitors administered after learning, weaken memory, suggesting that protein synthesis is required for memory consolidation. Additionally, reports have suggested that the effects of protein synthesis inhibitors also inhibit LTP. However, it should be noted that other results have shown that protein synthesis may not in fact be necessary for memory consolidation, as it has been found that the formation of memories can withstand vast amounts of protein synthesis inhibition, suggesting that this criterion of protein synthesis as necessary for memory consolidation is not unconditional.\n\nSystems Consolidation is the second form of memory consolidation. It is a reorganization process in which memories from the hippocampal region, where memories are first encoded, are moved to the neo-cortex in a more permanent form of storage. Systems consolidation is a slow dynamic process that can take from one to two decades to be fully formed in humans, unlike synaptic consolidation that only takes minutes to hours for new information to stabilize into memories.\n\nThe standard model of systems consolidation has been summarized by Squire and Alvarez (1995); it states that when novel information is originally encoded and registered, memory of these new stimuli becomes retained in both the hippocampus and cortical regions. Later the hippocampus’ representations of this information become active in explicit (conscious) recall or implicit (unconscious) recall like in sleep and ‘offline’ processes.\n\nMemory is retained in the hippocampus for up to one week after initial learning, representing the hippocampus-dependent stage. During this stage the hippocampus is ‘teaching’ the cortex more and more about the information and when the information is recalled it strengthens the cortico-cortical connection thus making the memory hippocampus-independent. Therefore, from one week and beyond the initial training experience, the memory is slowly transferred to the neo-cortex where it becomes permanently stored. In this view the hippocampus can perform the task of storing memories temporarily because the synapses are able to change quickly whereas the neocortical synapses change over time. Consolidation is thus the process whereby the hippocampus activates the neocortex continually leading to strong connections between the two. Since the hippocampus can only support memories temporarily the remaining activation will be seen only in the neocortex which is able to support memory indefinitely. Squire and Alvarez took the temporally graded nature of patients with retrograde amnesia as support for the notion that once a connection has been established within the neocortex the hippocampus is no longer required, but this process is dynamic and extends for several years.\n\nSquire and Alvarez also proposed the idea that MTL structures play a role in the consolidation of memories within the neocortex by providing a binding area for multiple cortical regions involved in the initial encoding of the memory. In this sense the MTL would act as a relay station for the various perceptual input that make up a memory and stores it as a whole event. After this has occurred the MTL directs information towards the neocortex to provide a permanent representation of the memory.\n\nMultiple trace theory (MTT) builds on the distinction between semantic memory and episodic memory and addresses perceived shortcomings of the standard model with respect to the dependency of the hippocampus. MTT argues that the hippocampus is always involved in the retrieval and storage of episodic memories. It is thought that semantic memories, including basic information encoded during the storage of episodic memories, can be established in structures apart from the hippocampal system such as the neo-cortex in the process of consolidation. Hence, while proper hippocampal functioning is necessary for the retention and retrieval of episodic memories, it is less necessary during the encoding and use of semantic memories. As memories age there are long-term interactions between the hippocampus and neo-cortex and this leads to the establishment of aspects of memory within structures aside from the hippocampus. MTT thus states that both episodic and semantic memories rely on the hippocampus and the latter becomes somewhat independent of the hippocampus during consolidation. \nAn important distinction between MTT and the standard model is that the standard model proposes that all memories become independent of the hippocampus after several years. However, Nadel and Moscovitch have shown that the hippocampus was involved in memory recall for all remote autobiographical memories no matter of their age. An important point they make while interpreting the results is that activation in the hippocampus was equally as strong regardless of the fact that the memories recalled were as old as 45 years prior to the date of the experiment. This is complicated by the fact that the hippocampus is constantly involved in the encoding of new events and activation due to this fact is hard to separate using baseline measures. Because of this, activation of the hippocampus during retrieval of distant memories may simply be a by-product of the subject encoding the study as an event.\n\nHaist, Gore, and Mao, sought to examine the temporal nature of consolidation within the hippocampus to test MTT against the standard view. They found that the hippocampus does not substantially contribute to the recollection of remote memories after a period of a few years. They claim that advances in the functional magnetic resonance imaging have allowed them to improve their distinction between the hippocampus and the entorhinal cortex which they claim is more enduring in its activation from remote memory retrieval. They also criticize the use of memories during testing which cannot be confirmed as accurate. Finally, they state that the initial interview in the scanner acted as an encoding event as such differences between recent and remote memories would be obscured.\n\nNadel and Moscovitch argued that when studying the structures and systems involved in memory consolidation, semantic memory and episodic memory need to be distinguished as relying on two different memory systems. When episodic information is encoded there are semantic aspects of the memory that are encoded as well and this is proposed as an explanation of the varying gradients of memory loss seen in amnesic patients. Amnesic patients with hippocampal damage show traces of memories and this has been used as support for the standard model because it suggests that memories are retained apart from the hippocampal system. Nadel and Mocovitch argue that these retained memories have lost the richness of experience and exist as depersonalized events that have been semanticized over time. They suggest that this instead provides support for their notion that episodic memories rely significantly on the hippocampal system but semantic memories can be established elsewhere in the brain and survive hippocampal damage.\n\nLearning can be distinguished by two forms of knowledge: declarative and procedural. Declarative information includes the conscious recall of facts, episodes, and lists, and its storage typically connected with the MTL and the hippocampal systems as it includes the encoding of both semantic and episodic information of events. Procedural knowledge however has been said to function separate from this system as it relies primarily on motor areas of the brain. The implicit nature of procedural knowledge allows it to exist absent from the conscious awareness that the information is there. Amnesic patients have shown retained ability to be trained on tasks and exhibit learning without the subject being aware that the training had ever taken place. This introduces a dissociation between the two forms of memory and the fact that one form can exist absent the other suggests separate mechanisms are involved in consolidation. Squire has proposed the procedural knowledge is consolidated in some cases by the extrapyramidal motor system. Squire demonstrated that intact learning of certain motor, perceptual, and cognitive skills can be retained in patients with amnesia. They also retain the ability to be influenced by priming effects without the patients being able to consciously recall any training session occurring.\n\nThe amygdala, specifically the basolateral region (BLA) is involved in the encoding of significant experiences and has been directly linked to memorable events. Extensive evidence suggests that stress hormones such as epinephrine play a critical role in consolidating new memories and this is why stressful memories are recalled vividly. Studies by Gold and van Buskirk provided initial evidence for this relationship when they showed that injections of epinephrine into subjects following a training period resulted in greater long-term retention of task related memories. This study also provided evidence that the level of epinephrine injected was related to the level of retention suggesting that the level of stress or emotionality of the memory plays a role on the level of retention. It is suggested that epinephrine affects memory consolidation by activating the amygdala and studies have shown that antagonism of beta-andrenoreceptors prior to injection of epinephrine will block the retention of memory effects seen previously. This is supported by the fact that beta-adrenoreceptor agonists have the opposite effect on the enhancement of memory consolidation. The BLA is thought to be actively involved in memory consolidation and is influenced strongly by stress hormones resulting in increased activation and as such increased memory retention. The BLA then projects to the hippocampus resulting in a strengthened memory. This relationship was studied by Packard and Chen who found that when glutamate was administered to the hippocampus, enhanced consolidation was seen during food-rewarded maze tasks. The opposite effect was also seen when the amygdala was inactivated using lidocane. Studies appear to suggest that the amygdala effects the consolidation of memories through its influence with stress hormones and the projections to other brain areas implicated in memory consolidation.\n\nRapid eye movement (REM) sleep has been thought of to be an important concept in the overnight learning in humans by establishing information in the hippocampal and cortical regions of the brain. REM sleep elicits an increase in neuronal activity following an enriched or novel waking experience, thus increasing neuronal plasticity and therefore playing an essential role in the consolidation of memories. This has come into question in recent years however and studies on sleep deprivation have shown that animals and humans who are denied REM sleep do not show deficits in task learning. It has been proposed that since the brain is in a non-memory encoding state during sleep, consolidation would be unlikely to occur.\nRecent studies have examined the relationship between REM sleep and procedural learning consolidation. \nIn particular studies have been done on sensory and motor related tasks. In one study testing finger-tapping, people were split into two groups and tested post-training with or without intervening sleep; results concluded that sleep post-training increases both speed and accuracy in this particular task, while increasing the activation of both cortical and hippocampal regions; whereas the post-training awake group had no such improvements. It has been theorized that this may be related more-so to a process of synaptic consolidation rather than systems consolidation because of the short-term nature of the process involved. Researchers examining the effect of sleep on motor learning have noted that while consolidation occurs over a period of 4–6 hours during sleep, this is also true during waking hours, which may negate any role of sleep in learning. In this sense sleep would serve no special purpose to enhance consolidation of memories because it occurs independently of sleep.\nOther studies have examined the process of replay which has been described as a reactivation of patterns that were stimulated during a learning phase. Replay has been demonstrated in the hippocampus and this has lent support to the notion that it serves a consolidation purpose. However, replay is not specific to sleep and both rats and primates show signs during restful-awake periods. Also, replay may simply be residual activation in areas that were involved previously in the learning phase and may have no actual effect on consolidation. This reactivation of the memory traces has also been seen in non-REM sleep specifically for hippocampus-dependant memories. Researchers have noted strong reactivation of the hippocampus during sleep immediately after a learning task. This reactivation led to enhanced performance on the learned task. Researchers following this line of work have come to assume that dreams are a by-product of the reactivation of the brain areas and this can explain why dreams may be unrelated to the information being consolidated. The dream experience itself is not what enhances memory performance but rather it is the reactivation of the neural circuits that causes this.\n\nZif268 is an Immediate Early Gene (IEG) thought to be involved in neuroplasticity by an up-regulation of the transcription factor during REM sleep after pre-exposure to an enriched environment. Results from studies testing the effects of zif268 on mice brains postmortem, suggest that a waking experience prior to sleep can have an enduring effect in the brain, due to an increase of neuroplasticity.\n\nMemory reconsolidation is the process of previously consolidated memories being recalled and actively consolidated. It is a distinct process that serves to maintain, strengthen and modify memories that are already stored in the long-term memory. Once memories undergo the process of consolidation and become part of long-term memory, they are thought of as stable. However, the retrieval of a memory trace can cause another labile phase that then requires an active process to make the memory stable after retrieval is complete. It is believed that post-retrieval stabilization is different and distinct from consolidation, despite its overlap in function (e.g. storage) and its mechanisms (e.g. protein synthesis). Memory modification needs to be demonstrated in the retrieval in order for this independent process to be valid.\n\nThe theory of reconsolidation has been debated for many years and is still controversial. Reconsolidation was first conceptualized in light of the discovery that phobias could often be eliminated by means of electroconvulsive shock therapy (ECT). This seemed to indicate the involvement of a re-consolidation process for excited memories, and that the operation active in ECT was the disruption of that process; here, of the reconsolidation of retrieved fear memories by shock administration.\n\nFurther studies investigated the concept, using ECT to test for reconsolidation; ECT was already known as an amnesic agent (leads to memory loss). These studies found it to be effective on retrieved memories when administered directly after the retrieval of a memory.\n\nLater research, wherein fear memories had been established in rats through Pavlovian fear conditioning, found that a consolidated fear memory can be brought to a labile state, by means of immediate amygdala infusions of the protein synthesis inhibitor anisomycin, but not by infusions made six hours afterwards. It was concluded that consolidated fear memory, when reactivated, enters a changeable state that requires \"de novo\" protein synthesis for new consolidation, i.e., re-consolidation of the old memory.\n\nIn addition to fear memories, appetitive memories are also prone to reconsolidation episodes, which can likewise be disrupted; namely, after local administration of a protein activity inhibitor.\n\nSince those breakthrough studies were done, there have been several others to probe the theory of memory reconsolidation. Subjects in these studies, along with humans, have included crabs, chicks, honeybees, medaka fish, lymnaea, and various rodents. Further studies have demonstrated an analogue of memory reconsolidation in spinal cord pain processing pathways, suggesting a general role for reconsolidation in the central nervous system.\n\nSome studies have supported this theory, while others have failed to demonstrate disruption of consolidated memory after retrieval. It is important to note that negative results may be examples of conditions where memories are not susceptible to a permanent disruption, thus a determining factor of reconsolidation. After much debate and a detailed review of this field it had been concluded that reconsolidation was a real phenomenon. Tronson and Taylor compiled a lengthy summary of multiple reconsolidation studies, noting a number of studies were unable to show memory impairments due to blocked reconsolidation. However the need for standardized methods was underscored as in some learning tasks such as fear conditioning, certain forms of memory reactivation could actually represent new extinction learning rather than activation of an old memory trace. Under this possibility, traditional disruptions of reconsolidation might actually maintain the original memory trace but preventing the consolidation of extinction learning. Recent work has suggested that epigenetic modifications may also prevent reconsolidation in some cases. The removal of these epigenetic modifications with inhibitors of histone deacetylase enabled the erasure of remote memories after recall.\n\nReconsolidation experiments are more difficult to run than typical consolidation experiments as disruption of a previously consolidated memory must be shown to be specific to the reactivation of the original memory trace. Furthermore, it is important to demonstrate that the vulnerability of reactivation occurs in a limited time frame, which can be assessed by delaying infusion till six hours after reactivation. It is also useful to show that the behavioral measure used to assess disruption of memory is not just due to task impairment caused by the procedure, which can be demonstrated by testing control groups in absence of the original learning. Finally, it is important to rule out alternative explanations, such as extinction learning by lengthening the reactivation phase. There have also been concerns about the use of reconsolidation research to justify psychotherapy treatments, and the generalizability of basic reconsolidation research into the therapy room\n\nQuestions arose if reconsolidation was a unique process or merely another phase of consolidation. Both consolidation and reconsolidation can be disrupted by pharmacological agents (e.g. the protein synthesis inhibitor anisomycin) and both require the transcription factor CREB. However, recent amygdala research suggests that BDNF is required for consolidation (but not reconsolidation) whereas the transcription factor and immediate early gene Zif268 is required for reconsolidation but not consolidation. A similar double dissociation between Zif268 for reconsolidation and BDNF for consolidation was found in the hippocampus for fear conditioning. However, not all memory tasks show this double dissociation, such as object recognition memory.\n\nIn the decade between 2005 and 2015, at least five groups argued the notion that memory reconsolidation can be used to treat psychological problems. Three of these groups have proposed that the wide variety of different psychotherapies produce permanent change in clients to the extent that they manage to activate this same neurobiological mechanism of reconsolidation in a way that leads to deconsolidation. Memory reconsolidation may be a common factor in many forms of psychotherapy.\n\n\n", "id": "21312297", "title": "Memory consolidation"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8888", "text": "Déjà vu\n\nDéjà vu () is the feeling that the situation currently being experienced has already been experienced in the past.\n\"Déjà vu\" is a feeling of familiarity, and déjà vécu (the feeling of having \"already lived through\" something) is a feeling of recollection.\nScientific approaches reject the explanation of \"déjà vu\" as \"precognition\" or \"prophecy\", but rather explain it as an anomaly of memory, which creates a distinct impression that an experience is \"being recalled\". This explanation is supported by the fact that the sense of \"recollection\" at the time is strong in most cases, but the circumstances of the \"previous\" experience (when, where, and how the earlier experience occurred) are uncertain or believed to be impossible. Two types of \"déjà vu\" are suggested to exist: the pathological type of \"déjà vu\" usually associated with epilepsy and the non-pathological which is a characteristic of healthy people and psychological phenomena.\n\nA 2004 review claimed that approximately two-thirds of the population have had \"déjà vu\" experiences. Other studies confirm that \"déjà vu\" is a common experience in healthy individuals, with between 31% and 96% of individuals reporting it. \"Déjà vu\" experiences that are unusually prolonged or frequent, or in association with other symptoms such as hallucinations, may be an indicator of neurological or psychiatric illness.\n\nThe phrase comes from French, literally meaning \"already seen\". \n\nEarly researchers tried to establish a link between \"déjà vu\" and mental disorders such as anxiety, dissociative identity disorder and schizophrenia but failed to find correlations of any diagnostic value. There does not seem to be a special association between déjà vu and schizophrenia.\n\nThe strongest pathological association of \"déjà vu\" is with temporal lobe epilepsy. This correlation has led some researchers to speculate that the experience of \"déjà vu\" is possibly a neurological anomaly related to improper electrical discharge in the brain, creating a strong sensation that an event or experience currently being experienced has already been experienced in the past. As most people suffer a mild (i.e. non-pathological) epileptic episode regularly (e.g. a hypnagogic jerk, the sudden \"jolt\" that frequently, but not always, occurs just prior to falling asleep), it is conjectured that a similar (mild) neurological aberration occurs in the experience of \"déjà vu\", resulting in an erroneous sensation of memory. Scientists have even looked into genetics when considering \"déjà vu\". Although there is not currently a gene associated with \"déjà vu\", the LGII gene on chromosome 10 is being studied for a possible link. Certain forms of the gene are associated with a mild form of epilepsy and, though by no means a certainty, \"déjà vu\", along with jamais vu, occurs often enough during seizures (such as simple partial seizures) that researchers have reason to suspect a link.\n\nA 2008 study found that \"déjà vu\" experiences are unlikely to be pathological dissociative experiences.\n\nCertain drugs increase the chances of \"déjà vu\" occurring in the user, resulting in a strong sensation that an event or experience currently being experienced has already been experienced in the past. Some pharmaceutical drugs, when taken together, have also been implicated in the cause of \"déjà vu\". Taiminen and Jääskeläinen (2001) reported the case of an otherwise healthy male who started experiencing intense and recurrent sensations of \"déjà vu\" upon taking the drugs amantadine and phenylpropanolamine together to relieve flu symptoms. He found the experience so interesting that he completed the full course of his treatment and reported it to the psychologists to write up as a case study. Because of the dopaminergic action of the drugs and previous findings from electrode stimulation of the brain (e.g. Bancaud, Brunet-Bourgin, Chauvel, & Halgren, 1994), Taiminen and Jääskeläinen speculate that \"déjà vu\" occurs as a result of hyperdopaminergic action in the mesial temporal areas of the brain.\n\nResearch has associated \"déjà vu\" experiences with good memory functions.\n\nThe similarity between a déjà-vu-eliciting stimulus and an existing, or non-existing but different, memory trace may lead to the sensation that an event or experience currently being experienced has already been experienced in the past. Thus, encountering something that evokes the implicit associations of an experience or sensation that \"cannot be remembered\" may lead to \"déjà vu\".\n\nIn an effort to reproduce the sensation experimentally, Banister and Zangwill (1941) used hypnosis to give participants posthypnotic amnesia for material they had already seen. When this was later re-encountered, the restricted activation caused thereafter by the posthypnotic amnesia resulted in 3 of the 10 participants reporting what the authors termed \"paramnesias\".\n\nMemory-based explanations may lead to the development of a number of non-invasive experimental methods by which a long sought-after analogue of \"déjà vu\" can be reliably produced that would allow it to be tested under well-controlled experimental conditions. Cleary suggests that \"déjà vu\" may be a form of familiarity-based recognition (recognition that is based on a feeling that an event or experience currently being experienced has already been experienced in the past) and that laboratory methods of probing familiarity-based recognition hold promise for probing \"déjà vu\" in laboratory settings.\n\nA 2012 study that used virtual reality technology to study reported \"déjà vu\" experiences supported this idea. This virtual reality investigation suggested that similarity between a new scene's spatial layout and the layout of a previously experienced scene in memory (but which fails to be recalled) may contribute to the \"déjà vu\" experience. When the previously experienced scene fails to come to mind in response to viewing the new scene, that previously experienced scene in memory can still exert an effect—that effect may be a feeling of familiarity with the new scene that is subjectively experienced as a feeling that an event or experience currently being experienced has already been experienced in the past, or of having been there before despite knowing otherwise.\n\nAnother possible explanation for the phenomenon of \"déjà vu\" is the occurrence of \"cryptomnesia\", which is where information learned is forgotten but nevertheless stored in the brain, and similar occurrences invoke the contained knowledge, leading to a feeling of familiarity because the event or experience being experienced has already been experienced in the past, known as \"\"déjà vu\"\". Some experts suggest that memory is a process of reconstruction, rather than a recall of fixed, established events. This reconstruction comes from stored components, involving elaborations, distortions, and omissions. Each successive recall of an event is merely a recall of the last reconstruction. The proposed sense of recognition (\"déjà vu\") involves achieving a good \"match\" between the present experience and our stored data. This reconstruction, however, may now differ so much from the original event that we \"know\" we have never experienced it before, even though it seems similar.\n\nIn 1963, Robert Efron of Boston's Veterans Hospital proposed that \"déjà vu\" is caused by dual neurological processing caused by delayed signals. Efron found that the brain's sorting of incoming signals is done in the temporal lobe of the brain's left hemisphere. However, signals enter the temporal lobe \"twice\" before processing, once from each hemisphere of the brain, normally with a slight delay of milliseconds between them. Efron proposed that if the two signals were occasionally not synchronized properly, then they would be processed as two separate experiences, with the second seeming to be a re-living of the first.\n\nOne theory of \"déjà vu\" attributes the feeling of having previously seen or experienced something that is currently being seen or experienced to that of having dreamt about a similar situation or place and then forgetting about it until one seems to be mysteriously reminded of the situation or the place while awake. The spontaneity of these types of \"déjà vu\" \"moments\" can catch many people off-guard, especially when they get the sensation from visiting a specific place they have never been to before, to the point where they are in a temporary state of shock and disbelief.\n\nJamais vu (from French, meaning \"never seen\") is a term in psychology which is used to describe any familiar situation which is not recognized by the observer.\n\nOften described as the opposite of \"déjà vu\", \"jamais vu\" involves a sense of eeriness and the observer's impression of seeing the situation for the first time, despite rationally knowing that he or she has been in the situation before. \"Jamais vu\" is more commonly explained as when a person momentarily does not recognize a word, person, or place that they already know. \"Jamais vu\" is sometimes associated with certain types of aphasia, amnesia, and epilepsy.\n\nTheoretically, a \"jamais vu\" feeling in a sufferer of a delirious disorder or intoxication could result in a delirious explanation of it, such as in the Capgras delusion, in which the patient takes a known person for a false double or impostor. If the impostor is himself, the clinical setting would be the same as the one described as depersonalisation, hence \"jamais vus\" of oneself or of the very \"reality of reality\", are termed depersonalisation (or surreality) feelings.\n\nThe feeling has been evoked through semantic satiation. Chris Moulin of the University of Leeds asked 95 volunteers to write the word \"door\" 30 times in 60 seconds. 68 percent of the subjects reported symptoms of \"jamais vu\", with some beginning to doubt that \"door\" was a real word.\n\nThe experience has also been named \"\"vuja de\"\" and \"\"véjà du\"\".\n\nPresque vu (, from French, meaning \"almost seen\") is the intense feeling of being on the very brink of a powerful epiphany, insight, or revelation, without actually achieving the revelation. The feeling is often therefore associated with a frustrating, tantalizing sense of incompleteness or near-completeness.\n\nDéjà rêvé (from French, meaning \"already dreamed\") is the feeling of having already dreamed something that you are now experiencing.\n\nDéjà entendu, (literally \"already heard\") is the experience of feeling sure about having already heard something, even though the exact details are uncertain or were perhaps imagined.\n\n\n", "id": "8888", "title": "Déjà vu"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=697303", "text": "Stephen Wiltshire\n\nStephen Wiltshire (born 24 April 1974) is a British architectural artist. He is known for his ability to draw from memory a landscape after seeing it just once. His work has gained worldwide popularity.\n\nIn 2006, Wiltshire was made a Member of the Order of the British Empire (MBE) for services to art. In the same year, he opened a permanent gallery on the Royal Opera Arcade in London.\n\nStephen Wiltshire was born in London, England, in 1974 to Caribbean parents, His father, Colvin, was a native of Barbados, and his mother, Geneva, is a native of St. Lucia. He grew up in Little Venice, Maida Vale, London. Wiltshire was mute when young. At the age of three, he was diagnosed with autism. The same year, his father died in a motorbike accident.\n\nAt the age of five, Wiltshire was sent to Queensmill School in London where he expressed interest in drawing. His early illustrations depicted animals and cars; he is still extremely interested in American cars and is said to have an encyclopaedic knowledge of them. When he was about seven, Wiltshire became fascinated with sketching landmark London buildings. After being shown a book of photos depicting the devastation wrought by earthquakes, he began to create detailed architectural drawings of imaginary cityscapes. He began to communicate through his art. The instructors at Queensmill School would deal with his lack of verbal communication skills by temporarily taking away his art supplies so that he would be forced to learn to ask for them. Stephen responded by making sounds and eventually uttered his first word—\"paper.\" His teachers encouraged his drawing, and with their aid Wiltshire learned to speak fully at the age of nine.\n\nIn June 2015, the BBC’s Lucy Ash reported: \"Soon people outside the school started noticing Stephen's gift and aged eight he landed his first commission - a sketch of Salisbury Cathedral for the former Prime Minister Edward Heath\". When he was ten, Wiltshire drew a sequence of drawings of London landmarks, one for each letter, that he called a \"London Alphabet\".\n\nIn 1987, Wiltshire was part of the BBC programme \"The Foolish Wise Ones\". \"Drawings\", a collection of his works, was published that same year.\n\nBetween 1995 and his graduation in 1998, Wiltshire attended the City and Guilds of London Art School in Kennington, Lambeth, South London.\n\nWiltshire can look at a subject once and then draw an accurate and detailed picture of it. He frequently draws entire cities from memory, based on single, brief helicopter rides. For example, he produced a detailed drawing of four square miles of London after a single helicopter ride above that city. His nineteen-foot-long drawing of 305 square miles of New York City is based on a single twenty-minute helicopter ride. He also draws fictional scenes, for example, St. Paul's Cathedral surrounded by flames.\n\nWiltshire's early books include \"Drawings\" (1987), \"Cities\" (1989), \"Floating Cities\" (1991), and \"Stephen Wiltshire's American Dream\" (1993). His third book, \"Floating Cities\" (Michael Joseph, 1991), was number one on the \"Sunday Times\" best-seller list.\n\nIn 2003, a retrospective of his work, 'Not a Camera: the Unique Vision of Stephen Wiltshire', was held in the Orleans House gallery in Twickenham, London.\n\nIn May 2005 Wiltshire produced his longest ever panoramic memory drawing of Tokyo on a canvas within seven days following a helicopter ride over the city. Since then he has drawn Rome, Hong Kong, Frankfurt, Madrid, Dubai, Jerusalem and London on giant canvasses. When Wiltshire took the helicopter ride over Rome, he drew it in such great detail that he drew the exact number of columns in the Pantheon.\n\nIn October 2009 Wiltshire completed the last work in the series of panoramas, an memory drawing of his \"spiritual home\", New York City. Following a 20-minute helicopter ride over the city he sketched the view of Manhattan, the Hudson shoreline of New Jersey, the Financial District, Ellis Island, the Statue of Liberty, and Brooklyn over five days at the Pratt Institute, a college of art and design in New York City.\n\nIn 2010, he made a panorama of Sydney to raise funds for and awareness of Autism Spectrum Australia (Aspect). He visited Bermuda National Gallery where the sale of his donated drawing of Hamilton raised over $22,000. In June 2010, Christie's auctioned off an oil painting of his \"Times Square at Night\".\n\nWiltshire started a tour of China in September 2010, with a first project taking him to Shanghai.\n\nA 2011 project in New York City involved Wiltshire's creation of a long panoramic memory drawing of New York which is now displayed on a giant billboard at John F. Kennedy International Airport. It is a part of a global advertising campaign for the Swiss bank UBS that carries the theme \"We will not rest\", \"The New York Times\" reported.\n\nIn July 2014, Wiltshire drew an aerial panorama of the Singapore skyline from memory after a brief helicopter ride, taking five days to complete the 1 x 4m artwork. The artwork was presented to President Tony Tan as the Singapore Press Holding (SPH)'s gift to the nation in celebration of Singapore's 50th birthday in 2015, and will be displayed at Singapore City Gallery, visitor centre of the country's urban planning authority, Urban Redevelopment Authority.\n\nWiltshire's work has been the subject of many TV documentaries. Renowned neurologist Oliver Sacks wrote about him in a chapter on prodigies in his book \"An Anthropologist on Mars\".\n\nIn 1989, Wiltshire appeared on the cover of \"You\" magazine with actor Dustin Hoffman, who had portrayed autistic savant Raymond Babbitt in the 1988 Oscar-winning film, \"Rain Man\", which Wiltshire considers to be one of his favorite movies.\n\nIn 2006, Wiltshire was appointed a Member of the Order of the British Empire (MBE) for services to art. In September 2006 Wiltshire opened his permanent gallery in the Royal Opera Arcade, Pall Mall, London.\n\nOn 15 February 2008, ABC News named him \"Person of the Week\".\n\nIn July 2009 he acted as ambassador of the Children's Art Day in the United Kingdom.\n\nIn 2011, Wiltshire was made an honorary Fellow of the Society of Architectural Illustration (SAI). In January 2015 Wiltshire was also made an honorary Fellow of The Scottish Association of Architectural Artists.\n\n\n", "id": "697303", "title": "Stephen Wiltshire"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1474988", "text": "Heterothallism\n\nHeterothallic species have sexes that reside in different individuals. The term is applied particularly to distinguish heterothallic fungi, which require two compatible partners to produce sexual spores, from homothallic ones, which are capable of sexual reproduction from a single organism.\n\nIn heterothallic fungi, two different individuals contribute nuclei to form a zygote. Examples of heterothallism are included for \"Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Aspergillus fumigatus, Aspergillus flavus\", \"Penicillium marneffei\" and \"Neurospora crassa\". The heterothallic life cycle of \"N. crassa\" is given in some detail, since similar life cycles are present in other heterothallic fungi.\n\nThe yeast \"Saccharomyces cerevisiae\" is heterothallic. This means that each yeast cell is of a certain mating type and can only mate with a cell of the other mating type. During vegetative growth that ordinarily occurs when nutrients are abundant, \"S. cerevisiae\" reproduces by mitosis as either haploid or diploid cells. However, when starved, diploid cells undergo meiosis to form haploid spores. Mating occurs when haploid cells of opposite mating type, MATa and MATα, come into contact. Ruderfer et al. pointed out that such contacts are frequent between closely related yeast cells for two reasons. The first is that cells of opposite mating type are present together in the same ascus, the sac that contains the tetrad of cells directly produced by a single meiosis, and these cells can mate with each other. The second reason is that haploid cells of one mating type, upon cell division, often produce cells of the opposite mating type with which they may mate.\n\nKatz Ezov et al. presented evidence that in natural \"S. cerevisiae\" populations clonal reproduction and a type of “self-fertilization” (in the form of intratetrad mating) predominate. Ruderfer et al. analyzed the ancestry of natural \"S. cerevisiae\" strains and concluded that outcrossing occurs only about once every 50,000 cell divisions. Thus, although \"S. cerevisiae\" is heterothallic, it appears that, in nature, mating is most often between closely related yeast cells. The relative rarity in nature of meiotic events that result from outcrossing suggests that the possible long-term benefits of outcrossing (e.g. generation of genetic diversity) are unlikely to be sufficient for generally maintaining sex from one generation to the next. Rather, a short term benefit, such as meiotic recombinational repair of DNA damages caused by stressful conditions such as starvation may be the key to the maintenance of sex in \"S. cerevisiae\".\n\n\"Aspergillus fumigatus\", is a heterothallic fungus. It is one of the most common \"Aspergillus\" species to cause disease in humans with an immunodeficiency. \"A. fumigatus\", is widespread in nature, and is typically found in soil and decaying organic matter, such as compost heaps, where it plays an essential role in carbon and nitrogen recycling. Colonies of the fungus produce from conidiophores thousands of minute grey-green conidia (2–3 μm) that readily become airborne. A. fumigatus possesses a fully functional sexual reproductive cycle that leads to the production of cleistothecia and ascospores.\n\nAlthough \"A. fumigatus\" occurs in areas with widely different climates and environments, it displays low genetic variation and lack of population genetic differentiation on a global scale. Thus the capability for heterothallic sex is maintained even though little genetic diversity is produced. As in the case of \"S. cereviae\", above, a short-term benefit of meiosis may be the key to the adaptive maintenance of sex in this species.\n\n\"A. flavus\" is the major producer of carcinogenic aflatoxins in crops worldwide. It is also an opportunistic human and animal pathogen, causing aspergillosis in immunocompromised individuals. In 2009, a sexual state of this heterothallic fungus was found to arise when strains of opposite mating type were cultured together under appropriate conditions.\n\nSexuality generates diversity in the aflatoxin gene cluster in \"A. flavus\", suggesting that production of genetic variation may contribute to the maintenance of heterothallism in this species.\n\nHenk et al. showed that the genes required for meiosis are present in P. marneffei, and that mating and genetic recombination occur in this species.\n\nHenk et al. concluded that \"P. marneffei\" is sexually reproducing, but recombination in natural populations is most likely to occur across spatially and genetically limited distances resulting in a highly clonal population structure. Sex is maintained in this species even though very little genetic variability is produced. Sex may be maintained in \"P. marneffei\" by a short-term benefit of meiosis, as in \"S. cerevisiae\" and \"A. fumigatus\", discussed above.\n\nThe sexual cycle of \"N. crassa\" is heterothallic. Sexual fruiting bodies (perithecia) can only be formed when two mycelia of different mating type come together. Like other ascomycetes, \"N. crassa\" has two mating types that, in this case, are symbolized by A and a. There is no evident morphological difference between the A and a mating type strains. Both can form abundant protoperithecia, the female reproductive structure (see Figure). Protoperithecia are formed most readily in the laboratory when growth occurs on solid (agar) synthetic medium with a relatively low source of nitrogen. Nitrogen starvation appears to be necessary for expression of genes involved in sexual development. The protoperithecium consists of an ascogonium, a coiled multicellular hypha that is enclosed in a knot-like aggregation of hyphae. A branched system of slender hyphae, called the trichogyne, extends from the tip of the ascogonium projecting beyond the sheathing hyphae into the air. The sexual cycle is initiated (i.e. fertilization occurs) when a cell (usually a conidium) of opposite mating type contacts a part of the trichogyne (see Figure). Such contact can be followed by cell fusion leading to one or more nuclei from the fertilizing cell migrating down the trichogyne into the ascogonium. Since both A and a strains have the same sexual structures, neither strain can be regarded as exclusively male or female. However, as a recipient, the protoperithecium of both the A and a strains can be thought of as the female structure, and the fertilizing conidium can be thought of as the male participant.\n\nThe subsequent steps following fusion of A and a haploid cells, have been outlined by Fincham and Day and Wagner and Mitchell. After fusion of the cells, the further fusion of their nuclei is delayed. Instead, a nucleus from the fertilizing cell and a nucleus from the ascogonium become associated and begin to divide synchronously. The products of these nuclear divisions (still in pairs of unlike mating type, i.e. A/a) migrate into numerous ascogenous hyphae, which then begin to grow out of the ascogonium. Each of these ascogenous hypha bends to form a hook (or crozier) at its tip and the A and a pair of haploid nuclei within the crozier divide synchronously. Next, septa form to divide the crozier into three cells. The central cell in the curve of the hook contains one A and one a nucleus (see Figure). This binuclear cell initiates ascus formation and is called an “ascus-initial” cell. Next the two uninucleate cells on either side of the first ascus-forming cell fuse with each other to form a binucleate cell that can grow to form a further crozier that can then form its own ascus-initial cell. This process can then be repeated multiple times.\n\nAfter formation of the ascus-initial cell, the A and a nuclei fuse with each other to form a diploid nucleus (see Figure). This nucleus is the only diploid nucleus in the entire life cycle of \"N. crassa\". The diploid nucleus has 14 chromosomes formed from the two fused haploid nuclei that had 7 chromosomes each. Formation of the diploid nucleus is immediately followed by meiosis. The two sequential divisions of meiosis lead to four haploid nuclei, two of the A mating type and two of the a mating type. One further mitotic division leads to four A and four a nuclei in each ascus. Meiosis is an essential part of the life cycle of all sexually reproducing organisms, and in its main features, meiosis in \"N. crassa\" seems typical of meiosis generally.\n\nAs the above events are occurring, the mycelial sheath that had enveloped the ascogonium develops as the wall of the perithecium, becomes impregnated with melanin, and blackens. The mature perithecium has a flask-shaped structure.\n\nA mature perithecium may contain as many as 300 asci, each derived from identical fusion diploid nuclei. Ordinarily, in nature, when the perithecia mature the ascospores are ejected rather violently into the air. These ascospores are heat resistant and, in the lab, require heating at 60 °C for 30 minutes to induce germination. For normal strains, the entire sexual cycle takes 10 to 15 days. In a mature ascus containing eight ascospores, pairs of adjacent spores are identical in genetic constitution, since the last division is mitotic, and since the ascospores are contained in the ascus sac that holds them in a definite order determined by the direction of nuclear segregations during meiosis. Since the four primary products are also arranged in sequence, a first division segregation pattern of genetic markers can be distinguished from a second division segregation pattern.\n\n", "id": "1474988", "title": "Heterothallism"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1522987", "text": "Gonochorism\n\nIn biology, gonochorism (\"Greek\" offspring + disperse) or unisexualism or gonochory describes the state of having just one of at least two distinct sexes in any one individual organism. The term is most often used with animals, in which the individual organisms are often gonochorous. Gonochory is less common in plants. For example, in flowering plants, individual flowers may be hermaphroditic (i.e. with both stamens and ovaries) or gonochorous (unisexual), having either no stamens (i.e. no male parts) or no ovaries (i.e. no female parts). Among flowering plant species that have unisexual flowers, some also produce hermaphrodite flowers, and the three types occur in different arrangements on separate plants; the plants can be monoecious, dioecious, polygamomonoecious, polygamodioecious, andromonoecious, or gynomonoecious.\n\nSex is most often genetically determined, but may be determined by other mechanisms. For example, alligators use temperature-dependent sex determination during egg incubation. Examples of gonochoric or dioecious pollination include hollies and kiwifruit. In these plants the male plant that supplies the pollen is referred to as the pollenizer.\n\nGonochorism stands in contrast to other reproductive strategies such as asexual reproduction and hermaphroditism. The sex of an individual may also change during its lifetime – this sequential hermaphroditism can for example be found in parrotfish and cockles.\n\n", "id": "1522987", "title": "Gonochorism"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2406859", "text": "Adelphogamy\n\nAdelphogamy is a form of sexual partnership between sibling eukaryotes, for example in some species of fungi, flowering plants or ants, or in humans. In sociology, the term \"adelphogamy\" may also refer to fraternal polyandry or to a relationship between a brother and sister.\n", "id": "2406859", "title": "Adelphogamy"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3647987", "text": "Allogamy\n\n\"Allogamy\" (cross-fertilization) is a term used in the field of biological reproduction describing the fertilization of an ovum from one individual with the spermatozoa of another. By contrast, autogamy is the term used for self-fertilization. In humans, the fertilization event is an instance of allogamy. Self-fertilization occurs in hermaphroditic organisms where the two gametes fused in fertilization come from the same individual. This is common in plants (see Sexual reproduction in plants) and certain protozoans.\n\nIn plants, allogamy is used specifically to mean the use of pollen from one plant to fertilize the flower of another plant and usually synonymous with the term \"cross-fertilization\" or \"cross-pollination\" (outcrossing), though the latter term can be used more specifically to mean pollen exchange between different plant strains or even different plant species (where the term \"cross-hybridization\" can be used) rather than simply between different individuals.\n\nParasites having complex life cycles can pass through alternate stages of allogamous and autogamous reproduction, and the description of a hitherto unknown allogamous stage can be a significant finding with implications for human disease.\n\nAllogamy ordinarily involves cross-fertilization between unrelated individuals leading to the masking of deleterious recessive alleles in progeny. By contrast, close inbreeding, including self-fertilization in plants and automictic parthenogenesis in hymenoptera, tends to lead to the harmful expression of deleterious recessive alleles (inbreeding depression).\n\nIn dioecious plants, the stigma may receive pollen from several different potential donors. As multiple pollen tubes from the different donors grow through the stigma to reach the ovary, the receiving maternal plant may carry out pollen selection favoring pollen from less related donor plants. Thus post-pollination selection may occur in order to promote allogamy and avoid inbreeding depression. Also, seeds may be aborted selectively depending on donor–recipient relatedness.\n\n\n", "id": "3647987", "title": "Allogamy"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7383487", "text": "Oospore\n\nAn oospore is a thick-walled sexual spore that develops from a fertilized oosphere in some algae, fungi, and Oomycetes.\n\nIn Oomycetes, oospores can also result from asexual reproduction, by apomixis.\n", "id": "7383487", "title": "Oospore"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7462137", "text": "Megagametogenesis\n\nMegagametogenesis is the development of a megaspore into an embryo sac, which is the gametophyte - though a highly reduced one - stage in the life cycle of vascular plants. \n\nIn eudicot plants, the entire process happens inside the ovule of a plant. The details of the process vary by species, but the process described here is common. This process starts with a single diploid megasporocyte in the nucleus. This megasporocyte undergoes meiotic cell division to form four cells that are haploid. Three cells die and one that is most distant from the micropyle develops into the megaspore. This megaspore becomes larger and the nucleus of it undergoes mitosis three times until there are eight nuclei. These eight nuclei are then arranged into two groups of four. These groups both send a nucleus to the center of the cell which then becomes the polar nuclei. The three cells left at the end of the cell near the micropylar become the egg apparatus with an egg cell in the center and two synergids. A cell wall forms around the other set of nuclei and forms the antipodals. The cells in the center develop into the central cell. This entire structure with its eight nuclei is called the embryo sac.\n\n\n", "id": "7462137", "title": "Megagametogenesis"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4709473", "text": "Gametangium\n\nA gametangium (plural: gametangia) is an organ or cell in which gametes are produced that is found in many multicellular protists, algae, fungi, and the gametophytes of plants. In contrast to gametogenesis in animals, a gametangium is a haploid structure and formation of gametes does not involve meiosis.\n\nDepending on the type of gamete produced in a gametangium, several types can be distinguished.\n\nFemale gametangia are most commonly called archegonia. They produce egg cells and are the sites for fertilization. Archegonia are common in algae and primitive plants as well as gymnosperms. In flowering plants, they are replaced by the embryo sac inside the ovule.\n\nThe male gametangia are most commonly called antheridia. They produce sperm cells that they release for fertilization. Antheridia producing non-motile sperm (spermatia) are called spermatangia. Some antheridia do not release their sperm. For example, the oomycete antheridium is a syncytium with many sperm nuclei and fertilization occurs via fertilization tubes growing from the antheridium and making contact with the egg cells. Antheridia are common in the gametophytes in \"lower\" plants such as bryophytes, ferns, cycads and ginkgo. In \"higher\" plants such as conifers and flowering plants, they are replaced by pollen grains.\n\nIn isogamy, the gametes look alike and cannot be classified into \"male\" or \"female.\" For example, in zygomycetes, two gametangia (single multinucleate cells at the end of hyphae) form good contact with each other and fuse into a zygosporangium. Inside the zygosporangium, the nuclei from each of the original two gametangia pair up.\n\n", "id": "4709473", "title": "Gametangium"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4964392", "text": "Voltinism\n\nVoltinism is a term used in biology to indicate the number of broods or generations of an organism in a year. The term is most often applied to insects, and is particularly in use in sericulture, where silkworm varieties vary in their voltinism.\n\n\nThe speckled wood butterfly is univoltine in the northern part of its range, e.g. northern Scandinavia. Adults emerge in late spring, mate, and die shortly after laying eggs; their offspring will grow until pupation, enter diapause in anticipation of the winter, and emerge as adults the following year - thus resulting in a single generation of butterflies per year. In southern Scandinavia, the same species is bivoltine - here, the offspring of spring-emerging adults will develop directly into adults during the summer, mate, and die. Their offspring in turn constitute a second generation, which is the generation that will enter winter diapause and emerge as adults (and mate) in the spring of the following year. This results in a pattern of one short-lived generation (ca. 2-3 months) that breeds during the summer, and one long-lived generation (ca. 9-10 months) that diapauses through the winter and breeds in the spring. The Rocky Mountain parnassian and the High brown fritillary are more examples of univoltine butterfly species.\n\nThe bee species \"Macrotera portalis\" is bivoltine, and is estimated to have about 2 or 3 broods annually. During winter, individuals remain in diapause, in their pharate or prepupal stage. This diapause stage continues until metamorphosis in the next spring or summer, whereupon the bees emerge as adults. \n\nThe Dawson's burrowing bee is an example of a univoltine insect of the order Hymenoptera. The brood of one winter will remain dormant underground until the following winter, and then will surface from their burrows to mate once, and establish new nests. \nThe term partial voltinism is used to refer to two different (but not necessarily exclusive) situations:\n\nThe number of breeding cycles in a year is under genetic control in many species and they are evolved in response to the environment. Many phytophagous species that are dependent on seasonal plant resources are univoltine. Some such species have the ability to diapause for a large part of the year, typically during a cold winter. Others that bore in wood or other low-grade, but plentiful, food material may spend nearly the entire year feeding, with only brief pupal, adult and egg stages to complete a univoltine life cycle. Yet other species that live in tropical regions with little seasonality may be highly multivoltine, with several generations feeding on constantly growing vegetation (such as some species of Saturniidae), or continually renewed detritus, such as \"Drosophila\" and many other genera of flies with a life cycle of just a week or two.\n\n", "id": "4964392", "title": "Voltinism"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7055324", "text": "Reproductive synchrony\n\nReproductive synchrony is a term used in evolutionary biology and behavioural ecology. Reproductive synchrony — sometimes termed 'ovulatory synchrony' — may manifest itself as 'breeding seasonality'. Where females undergo regular menstruation, 'menstrual synchrony' is another possible term.\n\nReproduction is said to be synchronised when fertile matings across a population are temporally clustered, resulting in multiple conceptions (and consequent births) within a restricted time window. In marine and other aquatic contexts, the phenomenon may be referred to as mass spawning. Mass spawning has been observed and recorded in a large number of phyla, including in coral communities within the Great Barrier Reef.\n\nIn primates, reproductive synchrony usually takes the form of conception and birth seasonality. The regulatory 'clock', in this case, is the sun's position in relation to the tilt of the earth. In nocturnal or partly nocturnal primates — for example, owl monkeys — the periodicity of the moon may also come into play. Synchrony in general is for primates an important variable determining the extent of 'paternity skew' — defined as the extent to which fertile matings can be monopolised by a fraction of the population of males. The greater the precision of female reproductive synchrony — the greater the number of ovulating females who must be guarded simultaneously — the harder it is for any dominant male to succeed in monopolising a harem all to himself. This is simply because, by attending to any one fertile female, the male unavoidably leaves the others at liberty to mate with his rivals. The outcome is to distribute paternity more widely across the total male population, reducing paternity skew (figures a, b).\n\nReproductive synchrony can never be perfect. On the other hand, theoretical models predict that group-living species will tend to synchronise wherever females can benefit by maximising the number of males offered chances of paternity, minimising reproductive skew. For example, the cichlid fish \"V. moorii\" spawns in the days leading up to each full moon (lunar synchrony), and broods often exhibit multiple paternity. The same models predict that female primates, including evolving humans, will tend to synchronise wherever fitness benefits can be gained by securing access to multiple males. Conversely, group-living females who need to restrict paternity to a single dominant harem-holder should assist him by avoiding synchrony.\n\nIn the human case, evolving females with increasingly heavy childcare burdens would have done best by \"resisting\" attempts at harem-holding by locally dominant males. No human female needs a partner who will get her pregnant only to disappear, abandoning her in favour of his next sexual partner. To any local group of females, the more such philandering can be successfully resisted — and the greater the proportion of previously excluded males who can be included in the breeding system and persuaded to invest effort — the better. Hence scientists would expect reproductive synchrony — whether seasonal, lunar or a combination of the two — to be central to evolving human strategies of reproductive levelling, reducing paternity skew and culminating in the predominantly monogamous egalitarian norms illustrated by extant hunter-gatherers. Divergent climate regimes differentiating Neanderthal reproductive strategies from those of modern \"Homo sapiens\" have recently been analysed in these terms.\n\n", "id": "7055324", "title": "Reproductive synchrony"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9798607", "text": "Sporogenesis\n\nSporogenesis is the production of spores in biology. The term is also used to refer to the process of reproduction via spores. Reproductive spores were found to be formed in eukaryotic organisms, such as plants, algae and fungi, during their normal reproductive life cycle. Dormant spores are formed, for example by certain fungi and algae, primarily in response to unfavorable growing conditions. Most eukaryotic spores are haploid and form through cell division, though some types are diploid or dikaryons and form through cell fusion.\n\nReproductive spores are generally the result of cell division, most commonly meiosis (e.g. in plant sporophytes). Sporic meiosis is needed to complete the sexual life cycle of the organisms using it.\n\nIn some cases, sporogenesis occurs via mitosis (e.g. in some fungi and algae). Mitotic sporogenesis is a form of asexual reproduction. Examples are the conidial fungi \"Aspergillus\" and \"Penicillium\", for which mitospore formation appears to be the primary mode of reproduction. Other fungi, such as ascomycetes, utilize both mitotic and meiotic spores. The red alga \"Polysiphonia\" alternates between mitotic and meiotic sporogenesis and both processes are required to complete its complex reproductive life cycle.\n\nIn the case of dormant spores in eukaryotes, sporogenesis often occurs as a result of fertilization or karyogamy forming a diploid spore equivalent to a zygote. Therefore, zygospores are the result of sexual reproduction.\n\nReproduction via spores involves the spreading of the spores by water or air. Algae and some fungi (chytrids) often use motile zoospores that can swim to new locations before developing into sessile organisms. Airborne spores are obvious in fungi, for example when they are released from puffballs. Other fungi have more active spore dispersal mechanisms. For example, the fungus \"Pilobolus\" can shoot its sporangia towards light. Plant spores designed for dispersal are also referred to as diaspores. Plant spores are most obvious in the reproduction of ferns and mosses. However, they also exist in flowering plants where they develop hidden inside the flower. For example, the pollen grains of flowering plants develop out of microspores produced in the anthers.\n\nReproductive spores grow into multicellular haploid individuals or sporelings. In heterosporous organisms, two types of spores exist: microspores give rise to males and megaspores to females. In homosporous organisms, all spores look alike and grow into individuals carrying reproductive parts of both genders.\n\nSporogenesis occurs in reproductive structures termed sporangia. The process involves sporogenous cells (sporocytes, also called spore mother cells) undergoing cell division to give rise to spores.\n\nIn meiotic sporogenesis, a diploid spore mother cell within the sporangium undergoes meiosis, producing a tetrad of haploid spores. In organisms that are heterosporous, two types of spores occur: Microsporangia produce male microspores, and megasporangia produce female megaspores. In megasporogenesis, often three of the four spores degenerate after meiosis, whereas in microsporogenesis all four microspores survive.\n\nIn gymnosperms, such as conifers, microspores are produced through meiosis from microsporocytes in microstrobili or male cones. In flowering plants, microspores are produced in the anthers of flowers. Each anther contains four pollen sacs, which contain the microsporocytes. After meiosis, each microspore undergoes mitotic cell division, giving rise to multicellular pollen grains (six nuclei in gymnosperms, three nuclei in flowering plants).\n\nMegasporogenesis occurs in megastrobili in conifers (for example a pine cone) and inside the ovule in the flowers of flowering plants. A megasporocyte inside a megasporangium or ovule undergoes meiosis, producing four megaspores. Only one is a functional megaspore whereas the others stay dysfunctional or degenerate. The megaspore undergoes several mitotic divisions to develop into a female gametophyte (for example the seven-cell/eight-nuclei embryo sac in flowering plants).\n\nSome fungi and algae produce mitospores through mitotic cell division within a sporangium. In fungi, such mitospores are referred to as conidia.\n\nSome algae, and fungi form resting spores made to survive unfavorable conditions. Typically, changes in the environment from favorable to unfavorable growing conditions will trigger a switch from asexual reproduction to sexual reproduction in these organisms. The resulting spores are protected through the formation of a thick cell wall and can withstand harsh conditions such as drought or extreme temperatures. Examples are chlamydospores, teliospores, zygospores, and myxospores. Similar survival structures produced in some bacteria are known as endospores.\nChlamydospores are generally multicellular, asexual structures. Teliospores are a form of chlamydospore produced through the fusion of cells or hyphae where the nuclei of the fused cells stay separate. These nuclei undergo karyogamy and meiosis upon germination of the spore.\n\nZygospores are formed in certain fungi (zygomycota, for example \"Rhizopus\") and some algae (for example \"Chlamydomonas\"). The zygospore forms through the isogamic fusion of two cells (motile single cells in \"Chlamydomonas\") or sexual conjugation between two hyphae (in zygomycota). Plasmogamy is followed by karyogamy, therefore zygospores are diploid (zygotes). They will undergo zygotic meiosis upon germinating.\n\nIn oomycetes, the zygote forms through the fertilization of an egg cell with a sperm nucleus and enters a resting stage as a diploid, thick-walled oospore. The germinating oospore undergoes mitosis and gives rise to diploid hyphae which reproduce asexually via mitotic zoospores as long as conditions are favorable.\n\nIn diatoms, fertilization gives rise to a zygote termed auxospore. Besides sexual reproduction and as a resting stage, the function of an auxospore is the restoration of the original cell size, as diatoms get progressively smaller during mitotic cell division. Auxospores divide by mitosis.\n\nThe term sporogenesis can also refer to endospore formation in bacteria, which allows the cells to survive unfavorable conditions. Endospores are not reproductive structures and their formation does not require cell fusion or division. Instead, they form through the production of an encapsulating spore coat within the spore-forming cell.\n\nThere are many parts of the spore 'plant'. The case that holds all the spores is called a sporangium.\n\n", "id": "9798607", "title": "Sporogenesis"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3052305", "text": "Polyspermy\n\nIn biology, polyspermy describes an egg that has been fertilized by more than one sperm. Diploid organisms normally contain two copies of each chromosome, one from each parent. The cell resulting from polyspermy, on the other hand, contains three or more copies of each chromosome—one from the egg and one each from multiple sperm. Usually, the result is an inviable zygote. This may occur because sperm are too efficient at reaching and fertilizing eggs due to the selective pressures of sperm competition. Such a situation is often deleterious to the female: in other words, the male-male competition among sperm spills over to create sexual conflict.\n\nIn the journal Proceedings of the Royal Society B, as reported in the New York Times, Dr. Nicola Hemmings, an evolutionary biologist at the University of Sheffield, and one of the study’s authors, reported that eggs of zebra finches and chickens require multiple sperm, from 10 to hundreds of sperm, to penetrate the egg to ensure successful fertilization and growth of the bird embryo.\n\nThe eggs of sexually reproducing organisms are adapted to avoid this situation. The defenses are particularly well characterized in the sea urchin, which responds to the acceptance of one sperm by inhibiting the successful penetration of the egg by subsequent sperm. Similar defenses exist in other eukaryotes.\n\nThe prevention of polyspermy in sea urchins depends on a change in the electrical charge across the surface of the egg, which is caused by the fusion of the first sperm with the egg. Unfertilized sea urchin eggs have a negative charge inside, but the charge becomes positive upon fertilization. When sea urchin sperm encounter an egg with a positive charge, sperm-egg fusion is blocked. Thus, after the first sperm contacts the egg and causes the change, subsequent sperms are prevented from fusing. This \"electrical polyspermy block\" is thought to result because a positively charged molecule in the sperm surface membrane is repelled by the positive charge at the egg surface.\n\nElectrical polyspermy blocks operate in many animal species, including frogs, clams, and marine worms, but not in the several mammals that have been studied (hamster, rabbit, mouse). In species without an electrical block, polyspermy is usually prevented by secretion of materials that establish a mechanical barrier to polyspermy. Animals such as sea urchins have a two-step polyspermy prevention strategy, with the fast, but transient, electrical block superseded after the first minute or so by a more slowly developing permanent mechanical block. It is thought that electrical blocks evolved in those species where a very fast block to polyspermy is needed, due to the presence of many sperm arriving simultaneously at the egg surface, as occurs in animals such as sea urchins. In sea urchins, fertilization occurs externally in the ocean, such that hundreds of sperm can encounter the egg within several seconds.\n\nIn mammals, in which fertilization occurs internally, fewer sperm reach the fertilization site in the oviduct. This may be the result of the female genital tract being adapted to minimize the number of sperm reaching the egg. Nevertheless, polyspermy preventing mechanisms are essential in mammals; a secretion reaction, the \"cortical reaction\" modifies the extracellular coat of the egg (the zona pellucida), and additional mechanisms that are not well understood modify the egg's plasma membrane. The zona pellucida is modified by serine proteases that are released from the cortical granules. The proteases destroy the protein link between the cell membrane and the vitelline envelope, remove any receptors that other sperm have bound to, and help to form the fertilization envelope from the cortical granules.\n\nThe cortical reaction occurs due to calcium oscillations inside the oocyte. What triggers such oscillations is PLC-zeta, a phospholipase unique to sperm that is very sensible to calcium concentrations. When the first spermatozoa gets inside the oocyte, it brings in PLC-zeta, that is activated by oocyte's basal calcium concentrations, initiates formation of IP3 and causes calcium release from endoplasmic reticulum stores, generating the oscillations in calcium concentration that will activate the oocyte and block polyspermy.\n\nFemale defenses select for ever more aggressive male sperm however, leading to an evolutionary arms race. On the one hand, polyspermy creates inviable zygotes and lowers female fitness, but on the other, defenses may prevent fertilization altogether. This leads to a delicate compromise between the two, and has been suggested as one possible cause for the relatively high infertility rates seen in mammalian species.\n\n\n\n", "id": "3052305", "title": "Polyspermy"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18182366", "text": "Telescoping generations\n\nTelescoping generations can occur in parthenogenetic species, such as aphids or other life forms that have the ability to reproduce without ovum fertilization. This occurrence is characterized by a viviparous female having a daughter growing inside her that is also parthenogenetically pregnant with a daughter cell.\n\nThis pattern of reproduction can also occur in certain mites that are not parthenogenetic, e.g. \"Adactylidium\", in which the young hatch and mate within the mother, eating her from the inside and then escaping; in some species the males never escape, and in others they die shortly afterwards. However, the resulting inbreeding has consequences much like those of parthenogenesis, and the females are not actually pregnant on hatching but become pregnant before emerging into free living.\n", "id": "18182366", "title": "Telescoping generations"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18899714", "text": "Sperm sorting\n\nSperm sorting is a means of choosing what type of sperm cell is to fertilize the egg cell. Several conventional techniques of sperm sorting have been routinely used in assisted reproductive technologies including the method of density gradient centrifugation or swim-up. Newly applied methods such as flow cytometry expand the possibilities of sperm sorting and new techniques of sperm sorting are being developed.\n\nIt can be used to sort out sperm that are most healthy, as well as for determination of more specific traits, such as sex selection in which spermatozoa are separated into X- (female) and Y- (male) chromosome bearing populations based on their difference in DNA content. The resultant 'sex-sorted' spermatozoa are then able to be used in conjunction with other assisted reproductive technologies such as artificial insemination or in-vitro fertilization (IVF) to produce offspring of the desired sex - in farming animals but also in human medical practice.\n\nSeveral methods have been used to sort sperm before the advent of flow cytometry. Density gradient centrifugation (in a continuous or discontinuous gradient) can concentrate semen samples with low concentration of sperm, using the density of sperm as a measure of their quality. Similarly, so-called swim-up techniques apply a centrifugation step and then sperm is allowed to swim up into a medium, thus enriching a subpopulation of motile sperm. However, use of sperm centrifugation is detrimental to the sperm viability and elicits production of reactive oxygen species. Conventional techniques are routinely used in assisted reproductive technology.\n\nFlow cytometry is another method used to sort sperm and adaptations of this technique opens new opportunities in sperm sorting. However, because flow cytometry-based sperm sorting often uses fluorescent dyes that often stain DNA, the safety of this technique in human reproductive medicine is a matter of scientific discussion.\n\nHowever, flow cytometry is the only currently used technique able to determine the sex of future progeny by measuring DNA content of individual sperm cells. It evaluates if they contain the larger X chromosome (giving rise to a female offspring) or smaller Y chromosome (leading to male progeny). It then allows separation of X and Y sperm. The so-called \"Beltsfield Sperm Sexing Technology\" was developed by USDA in conjunction with Lawrence Livermore National Laboratories, relying on the DNA difference between the X- and Y- chromosomes. Prior to flow cytometric sorting, semen is labeled with a fluorescent dye called Hoechst 33342 which binds to the DNA of each spermatozoon. As the X chromosome is larger (i.e. has more DNA) than the Y chromosome, the \"female\" (X-chromosome bearing) spermatozoa will absorb a greater amount of dye than its male (Y-chromosome bearing) counterpart. As a consequence, when exposed to UV light during flow cytometry, X spermatozoa fluoresce brighter than Y- spermatozoa. As the spermatozoa pass through the flow cytometer in single file, each spermatozoon is encased by a single droplet of fluid and assigned an electric charge corresponding to its chromosome status (e.g. X-positive charge, Y-negative charge). The stream of X- and Y- droplets is then separated by means of electrostatic deflection and collected into separate collection tubes for subsequent processing.\n\nAnother cytometric technique used in sperm sorting is magnetic-activated cell sorting (MACS) which is routinely applied in assisted reproduction hospitals to sort out sperm with fragmented DNA. This is achieved using antibodies to surface markers of programmed cell death (apoptosis) such as annexin V, coupled with magnetic beads. Following the binding of these antibodies, spermatozoa which undergo apoptosis are sorted by applying magnetic field to the sperm suspension. MACS obviates the need for fluorescent DNA binding molecules.\n\nDNA damage in sperm cells may be detected by using Raman spectroscopy. It is not specific enough to detect individual traits, however. The sperm cells having least DNA damage may subsequently be injected into the egg cell by intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI). Many other methods for sperm sorting have been proposed or are currently tested.\n\nSperm undergoes a process of natural selection when millions of sperm enter vagina but only few reach the egg cell and then only one is usually allowed to fertilize it. The sperm is selected not only by its highest motility but also by other factors such as DNA integrity, production of reactive oxygen species and viability. This selection is largely circumvented in case of in-vitro fertilization which leads to higher incidence of birth defects associated with assisted reproductive techniques. Egg cells are often fertilized by sperm which would have low chance of fertilizing it in natural conditions. Sperm sorting could thus be used to decrease risks associated with assisted reproduction. Additionally, there is ongoing debate about using sperm sorting for choosing the child's sex.\n\nConventional methods of sperm sorting have been widely used to assess quality of sperm before subsequent artificial insemination or in-vitro fertilization. It has been verified that sperm sorted using these techniques is of superior quality than unsorted. However, important characteristics of sperm such as DNA integrity remain untested by these conventional methods. New flow-cytometry based techniques such as YO-PRO staining can discriminate apoptotic and dead spermatozoa from the viable ones. For example, annexin V staining followed by MACS can significantly improve pregnancy rates in couples with previous assisted reproduction failure.\n\nSperm sorting by flow cytometry is an established technique in veterinary practice, and in the dairy industry most female cows are artificially inseminated with sorted semen to increase the number of female calves (using sperm sorting is less common in other species of farm animals, however artificial insemination is common). Artificial insemination of farm animals with sorted sperm is recognized by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) as a promising way of increasing efficiency of agriculture needed to produce enough food for the growing human population. Utilizing artificial insemination with sorted sperm is seen as a way to create an optimal ratio of male and female calves to increase dairy milk production.\n\nChoosing the sex of children might help prevent sex-associated heritable diseases such as Duchene muscular dystrophy or haemophilia in families with a history of these diseases. On the other hand, sperm sorting in humans raises the ethical concerns implicit to the idea of sex selection. If applied large-scale, it has a potential to elicit a sex-ratio imbalance. It could also have implications on gender equality if parents consistently choose to have a boy as their first-born (first-borns were shown to be more likely to succeed in life).\n\nDuring the early to mid-1980s, Glenn Spaulding was the first to sort viable whole human and animal spermatozoa using a flow cytometer, and utilized the sorted motile rabbit sperm for artificial insemination. Subsequently, the first patent application disclosing the method to sort \"two viable subpopulations enriched for x- or y- sperm\" was filed in April 1987 as US Application Serial Number 35,986 and later became part of US Patent 5,021,244; and the patent included the discovery of haploid expression (sex-associated membrane proteins, or SAM proteins) and the development of monoclonal antibodies to those proteins. Additional applications and methods were added, including antibodies, from 1987 through 1997. At the time of the patent filing, both Lawrence Livermore National Laboratories and the USDA were only sorting fixed sperm nuclei, after the Application Serial Number 35,986 patent filing a new technique was utilized by the USDA where \"sperm were briefly sonicated to remove tails\".\n\nThere is no country in the world which explicitly permits sex selection for non-medical purposes. There were 31 countries in 2009 which allowed sex selection in case of sex-linked disease risk or other medical purpose. In the US, for humans, the application of sperm sorting in sex selection is tightly regulated by the FDA. After the establishment of the MicroSort technique, it was offered to parents as a part of a clinical trial. The procedure was made available to a limited number of participants each month, in addition to fulfilling certain criteria, such as having a disease with sex linkage or having at least one child (for family balancing). There are currently MicroSort laboratories and collaborating physicians in several countries (some for general purposes, some only offering service in case of genetic disease risks associated with one sex).\n\nWhile highly accurate, sperm sorting by flow cytometry will not produce two completely separate populations. That is to say, there will always be some \"male\" sperm among the \"female\" sperm and vice versa. The exact percentage purity of each population is dependent on the species being sorted and the 'gates' which the operator places around the total population visible to the machine. In general, the larger the DNA difference between the X and Y chromosome of a species, the easier it is to produce a highly pure population. In sheep and cattle, purities for each sex will usually remain above 90% depending on 'gating', while for humans these may be reduced to 90% and 70% for \"female\" and \"male\" spermatozoa, respectively.\n\n", "id": "18899714", "title": "Sperm sorting"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1544170", "text": "Anisogamy\n\nAnisogamy (also called heterogamy) is the form of sexual reproduction that involves the union or fusion of two gametes, which differ in size and/or form. (The related adjectives are \"anisogamous\" and \"anisogamic\"). The smaller gamete is considered to be male (sperm cell), whereas the larger gamete is regarded as female (egg cell).\n\nThere are several types of anisogamy. Both gametes may be flagellated and therefore motile. Alternatively, both of the gametes may be non-flagellated. The latter situation occurs in some algae and plants. In the red alga \"Polysiphonia\", non-motile eggs are fertilized by non-motile sperm. In flowering plants, the gametes are non-motile cells within gametophytes.\n\nThe form of heterogamy that occurs in animals, including humans, is oogamy. In oogamy, a large, non-motile egg (ovum) is fertilized by a small, motile sperm (spermatozoon). The egg is optimized for longevity, whereas the small sperm is optimized for motility and speed. The size and resources of the egg cell allow for the production of pheromones, which attract the swimming sperm cells.\n\nAnisogamy is a fundamental concept of sexual dimorphism that helps explain phenotypic differences between sexes. In most species a male and female sex exist, both of which are optimized for reproductive potential. Due to their differently sized and shaped gametes, both males and females have developed physiological and behavioral differences that optimize the individual’s fecundity. Since most egg laying females typically must bear the offspring and have a more limited reproductive cycle, this typically makes females a limiting factor in the reproductive success rate of males in a species. This process is also true for females selecting males, and assuming that males and females are selecting for different traits in partners, would result in phenotypic differences between the sexes over many generations. This hypothesis, known as the Bateman’s Principle, is used to understand the evolutionary pressures put on males and females due to anisogamy. Although this assumption has criticism, it is a generally accepted model for sexual selection within anisogamous species. The selection for different traits depending on sex within the same species is known as sex-specific selection, and accounts for the differing phenotypes found between the sexes of the same species. This sex-specific selection between sexes over time also lead to the development of secondary sex characteristics, which assist males and females in reproductive success.\n\nIn most species, both sexes choose mates based on the available phenotypes of potential mates. These phenotypes are species specific, resulting in varying strategies for successful sexual reproduction. For example, large males are sexually selected for in elephant seals for their large size helps the male fight off other males, but small males are sexually selected for in spiders for they can mate with the female more quickly while avoiding sexual cannibalism. However, despite the large range of sexually selected phenotypes, most anisogamous species follow a set of predictable desirable traits and selective behaviors based on general reproductive success models.\n\nFor internal fertilizers, female investment is high in reproduction since they typically expend more energy throughout a single reproductive event. This can be seen as early as oogenesis, for the female sacrifices gamete number for gamete size to better increase the survival chances of the potential zygote; a process more energetically demanding than spermatogenesis in males. Oogenesis occurs in the ovary, a female specific organ that also produces hormones to prepare other female-specific organs for the changes necessary in the reproductive organs to facilitate egg delivery in external fertilizers, and zygote development in internal fertilizers. The egg cell produced is not only large, but sometimes even immobile, requiring contact with the more mobile sperm to instigate fertilization.\n\nSince this process is very energy-demanding and time consuming for the female, mate choice is often integrated into the female’s behavior. Females will often be very selective of the males they choose to reproduce with, for the phenotype of the male can be indicative of the male’s physical health and heritable traits. Females employ mate choice to pressure males into displaying their desirable traits to females through courtship, and if successful, the male gets to reproduce. This encourages males and females of specific species to invest in courtship behaviors as well as traits that can display physical health to a potential mate. This process, known as sexual selection, results in the development of traits to ease reproductive success rather than individual survival, such as the inflated size of a termite queen. It is also important for females to select against potential mates that may have a sexually transmitted infection, for the disease could not only hurt the female’s reproductive ability, but also damage the resulting offspring.\n\nAlthough not uncommon in males, females are more associated with parental care. Since females are on a more limited reproductive schedule than males, a female often invests more in protecting the offspring to sexual maturity than the male. Like mate choice, the level of parental care varies greatly between species, and is often dependent on the number of offspring produced per sexual encounter.\n\nIn most species such as \"Drosophila melanogaster,\" females can utilize sperm storage, a process by which the female can store excess sperm from a mate, and fertilize her eggs long after the reproductive event if mating opportunities drop or quality of mates decreases. By being able to save sperm from more desirable mates, the female gains more control over its own reproductive success, thus allowing for the female to be more selective of males as well as making the timing of fertilization potentially more frequent if males are scarce.\n\nFor males of all species, the sperm cells they produce are optimized for ensuring fertilization of the female egg. These sperm cells are created through spermatogenesis, a form of gametogenesis that focuses on developing the most possible gametes per sexual encounter. Spermatogenesis occurs in the testes, a male specific organ that is also produces hormones that trigger the development of secondary sex characteristics. Since the male’s gametes are energetically cheap and abundant in every ejaculation, a male can greatly increase his sexual success by mating far more frequently than the female. Sperm, unlike egg cells, are also mobile, allowing for the sperm to swim towards the egg through the female’s sexual organs. Sperm competition is also a major factor in the development of sperm cells. Only one sperm can fertilize an egg, and since females can potentially reproduce with more than one male before fertilization occurs, producing sperm cells that are faster, more abundant, and more viable than that produced by other males can give a male reproductive advantage.\n\nSince females are often the limiting factor in a species reproductive success, males are often expected by the females to search and compete for the female, known as intraspecific competition. This can be seen in organisms such as bean beetles, as the male that searches for females more frequently is often more successful at finding mates and reproducing. In species undergoing this form of selection, a fit male would be one that is fast, has more refined sensory organs, and spatial awareness.\n\nSome secondary sex characteristics are not only meant for attracting mates, but also for competing with other males for copulation opportunities. Some structures, such as antlers in deer, can provide benefits to the male’s reproductive success by providing a weapon to prevent rival males from achieving reproductive success. However, other structures such as the large colorful tail feathers found in male peacocks, are a result of Fisherian Runaway as well as several more species specific factors. Due to females selecting for specific traits in males, over time, these traits are exaggerated to the point where they could hinder the male’s survivability. However, since these traits greatly benefit sexual selection, their usefulness in providing more mating opportunities overrides the possibility that the trait could lead to s shortening of its lifespan through predation or starvation. These desirable traits extend beyond physical body parts, and often extend into courtship behavior and nuptial gifts as well.\n\nAlthough some behaviors in males are meant to work within the parameters of cryptic female choice, some male traits work against it. Strong enough males, in some cases, can force themselves upon a female, forcing fertilization and overriding female choice. Since this can often be dangerous for the female, an Evolutionary Arms Race between the sexes is often an outcome.\n\nAnisogamy is the phenomenon of fertilization of large gametes (egg cells, ova) by (or with) small gametes (sperm cells: spermatozoa or spermatia). Gamete size difference is the fundamental difference between females and males. Anisogamy first evolved in multicellular haploid species after the differentiation of different mating types had already been established. However, in Ascomycetes, anisogamy evolved from isogamy before mating types.\n\nThe three main theories for the evolution of anisogamy are gamete competition, gamete limitation, and intracellular conflicts, but the last of these three is not well supported by current evidence. Both gamete competition and gamete limitation assume that anisogamy originated through disruptive selection acting on an ancestral isogamous population with external fertilization, due to a trade-off between larger gamete number and gamete size (which in turn affects zygote survival), because the total resource one individual can invest in reproduction is assumed to be fixed.\n\nThe first formal, mathematical theory proposed to explain the evolution of anisogamy was based on gamete limitation: this model assumed that natural selection would lead to gamete sizes that result in the largest population-wide number of successful fertilizations. If it is assumed that a certain amount of resources provided by the gametes are needed for the survival of the resulting zygote, and that there is a trade-off between the size and number of gametes, then this optimum was shown to be one where both small (male) and large (female) gametes are produced. However, these early models assume that natural selection acts mainly at the population level, something that is today known to be a very problematic assumption.\n\nThe first mathematical model to explain the evolution of anisogamy via individual level selection, and one that became widely accepted was the theory of gamete or sperm competition. Here, selection happens at the individual level: those individuals that produce more (but smaller) gametes also gain a larger proportion of fertilizations simply because they produce a larger number of gametes that 'seek out' those of the larger type. However, because zygotes formed from larger gametes have better survival prospects, this process can again lead to the divergence of gametes sizes into large and small (female and male) gametes. The end result is one where it seems that the numerous, small gametes compete for the large gametes that are tasked with providing maximal resources for the offspring.\n\nSome recent theoretical work has challenged the gamete competition theory, by showing that gamete limitation by itself can lead to the divergence of gamete sizes even under selection at the individual level. While this is possible, it has also been shown that gamete competition and gamete limitation are the ends of a continuum of selective pressures, and they can act separately or together depending on the conditions. These selection pressures also act in the same direction (to increase gamete numbers at the expense of size) and at the same level (individual selection). Theory also suggests that gamete limitation could only have been the dominant force of selection for the evolutionary origin of the sexes under quite limited circumstances, and the presence on average of just one competitor can makes the 'selfish' evolutionary force of gamete competition stronger than the 'cooperative' force of gamete limitation even if gamete limitation is very acute (approaching 100% of eggs remaining unfertilized).\n\nThere is then a relatively sound theory base for understanding this fundamental transition from isogamy to anisogamy in the evolution of reproduction, which is predicted to be associated with the transition to multicellularity. Some comparative empirical evidence for the gamete competition theories exists, although it is difficult to use this evidence to fully tease apart the competition and limitation theories because their testable predictions are similar. It has also been claimed that some of the organisms used in such comparative studies do not fit the theoretical assumptions well.\n\n", "id": "1544170", "title": "Anisogamy"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19925030", "text": "Homothallism\n\nHomothallic refers to the possession, within a single organism, of the resources to reproduce sexually; i.e., having male and female reproductive structures on the same thallus. The opposite sexual functions are performed by different cells of a single mycelium.\n\nIt can be contrasted to heterothallic.\n\nIt is often used to categorize fungi. In yeast, heterothallic cells have mating types a and α. An experienced mother cell (one that has divided at least once) will switch mating type every cell division cycle because of the \"HO\" allele.\n\nSexual reproduction commonly occurs in two fundamentally different ways in fungi. These are outcrossing (in heterothallic fungi) in which two different individuals contribute nuclei to form a zygote, and self-fertilization or selfing (in homothallic fungi) in which both nuclei are derived from the same individual.\n\nAmong the 250 known species of aspergilli, about 36% have an identified sexual state. Among those \"Aspergillus\" species for which a sexual cycle has been observed, the majority in nature are homothallic (self-fertilizing). Selfing in the homothallic fungus \"Aspergillus nidulans\" involves activation of the same mating pathways characteristic of sex in outcrossing species, i.e. self-fertilization does not bypass required pathways for outcrossing sex but instead requires activation of these pathways within a single individual. Fusion of haploid nuclei occurs within reproductive structures termed cleistothecia, in which the diploid zygote undergoes meiotic divisions to yield haploid ascospores.\n\nA lichen is a composite organism consisting of a fungus and a photosynthetic partner that are growing together in a symbiotic relationship. The photosynthetic partner is usually either a green alga or a cyanobacterium. Lichens occur in some of the most extreme environments on Earth—arctic tundra, hot deserts, rocky coasts, and toxic slag heaps. Most lichenized fungi produce abundant sexual structures and in many species sexual spores appear to be the only means of dispersal (Murtagh et al., 2000). The lichens \"Graphis scripta\" and \"Ochrolechia parella\" do not produce symbiotic vegetative propagules. Rather the lichen-forming fungi of these species reproduce sexually by self-fertilization (i.e. they are homothallic), and it was proposed that this breeding system allows successful reproduction in harsh environments (Murtagh et al., 2000).\nHomothallism appears to be common in natural populations of fungi. Although self-fertilization employs meiosis, it produces minimal genetic variability. Homothallism is thus a form of sex that is unlikely to be adaptively maintained by a benefit related to producing variability. However, homothallic meiosis may be maintained in fungi as an adaptation for surviving stressful conditions; a proposed benefit of meiosis is the promoted homologous meiotic recombinational repair of DNA damages that are ordinarily caused by a stressful environment.\n\n\n", "id": "19925030", "title": "Homothallism"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22610793", "text": "Semelparity and iteroparity\n\nSemelparity and iteroparity are two classes of possible reproductive strategies available to living organisms. A species is considered semelparous if it is characterized by a single reproductive episode before death, and iteroparous if it is characterized by multiple reproductive cycles over the course of its lifetime. Some botanists use the parallel terms monocarpy and polycarpy. (See also plietesials.)\n\nIn truly semelparous species, death after reproduction is part of an overall strategy that includes putting all available resources into maximizing reproduction, at the expense of future life (see \"Trade-offs\", below). In any iteroparous population there will be some individuals who die between their first and second reproductive episodes, but unless this is part of a syndrome of programmed death after reproduction, this would not be called semelparity.\n\nThis distinction is also related to the difference between annual and perennial plants. An annual is a plant that completes its life cycle in a single season, and is usually semelparous. Perennials live for more than one season and are usually (but not always) iteroparous.\n\nSemelparity and iteroparity are not, strictly speaking, alternative strategies, but extremes along a continuum of possible modes of reproduction. Many organisms considered to be semelparous can, under certain conditions, separate their single bout of reproduction into two or more episodes.\n\nThe word semelparity was coined by evolutionary biologist Lamont Cole, and comes from the Latin \"semel\" 'once, a single time' and \"pario\" 'to beget'. This differs from iteroparity in that iteroparous species are able to have multiple reproductive cycles and therefore can mate more than once in their lifetime. Semelparity is also known as \"big bang\" reproduction, since the single reproductive event of semelparous organisms is usually large as well as fatal. A classic example of a semelparous organism is Pacific salmon (\"Oncorhynchus\" spp.), which lives for many years in the ocean before swimming to the freshwater stream of its birth, spawning, and dying. Other semelparous animals include many insects, including some species of butterflies, cicadas, and mayflies, many arachnids, and some molluscs such as some species of squid and octopus.\n\nSemelparity also occurs in smelt and capelin, but is very rare in vertebrates other than bony fish. In amphibians, it is known only among some \"Hyla\" frogs including the gladiator frog; in reptiles only a few lizards such as Labord's chameleon of southwestern Madagascar and \"Sceloporus bicanthalis\" of the high mountains of Mexico; and among mammals only in a few didelphid and dasyurid marsupials. Annual plants, including all grain crops and most domestic vegetables, are semelparous. Long-lived semelparous plants include century plant (agave), \"Lobelia telekii\", and some species of bamboo.\n\nThis form of lifestyle is consistent with r-selected strategies as many offspring are produced and there is low parental input, as one or both parents die after mating. All of the male’s energy is diverting into mating and the immune system is repressed. High levels of corticosteroids are sustained over long periods of time. This triggers immune and inflammatory system failure and gastrointestinal hemorrhage, which eventually leads to death.\n\nThe term iteroparity comes from the Latin \"itero\", to repeat, and \"pario\", to beget. An example of an iteroparous organism is a human—though people may choose to have only one child (or even none), humans are biologically capable of having offspring many times over the course of their lives. \n\nIteroparous vertebrates include all birds, most reptiles, virtually all mammals, and most fish. Among invertebrates, most mollusca and many insects (for example, mosquitoes and cockroaches) are iteroparous. Most perennial plants are iteroparous.\n\nIt is a biological precept that within its lifetime an organism has a limited amount of energy/resources available to it, and must always partition it among various functions such as collecting food and finding a mate. Of relevance here is the trade-off between fecundity, growth, and survivorship in its life history strategy. These trade-offs come into play in the evolution of iteroparity and semelparity. It has been repeatedly demonstrated that semelparous species produce more offspring in their single fatal reproductive episode than do closely related iteroparous species in any one of theirs. However, the opportunity to reproduce more than once in a lifetime, and possibly with greater care for the development of offspring produced, can offset this strictly numerical benefit.\n\nOne class of models that tries to explain the differential evolution of semelparity and iteroparity examines the shape of the trade-off between offspring produced and offspring forgone. In economic terms, offspring produced is equivalent to a benefit function, while offspring forgone is comparable to a cost function. The reproductive effort of an organism—the proportion of energy that it puts into reproducing, as opposed to growth or survivorship—occurs at the point where the distance between offspring produced and offspring forgone is the greatest. The accompanying graph shows the offspring-produced and offspring-forgone curves for an iteroparous organism: \nIn the first graph, the marginal cost of offspring produced is decreasing (each additional offspring is less \"expensive\" than the average of all previous offspring) and the marginal cost of offspring forgone is increasing. In this situation, the organism only devotes a portion of its resources to reproduction, and uses the rest of its resources on growth and survivorship so that it can reproduce again in the future. However, it is also possible (second graph) for the marginal cost of offspring produced to \"increase\", and for the marginal cost of offspring forgone to decrease. When this is the case, it is favorable for the organism to reproduce a single time. The organism devotes all of its resources to that one episode of reproduction, so it then dies. This mathematical/graphical model has found only limited quantitative support from nature.\n\nA second set of models examines the possibility that iteroparity is a hedge against unpredictable juvenile survivorship (avoiding putting all one's eggs in one basket). Again, mathematical models have not found empirical support from real-world systems. In fact, many semelparous species live in habitats characterized by high (not low) environmental unpredictability, such as deserts and early successional habitats.\n\nThe models that have the strongest support from living systems are demographic. In Lamont Cole's classic 1954 paper, he came to an interesting conclusion: \nFor example, imagine two species—an iteroparous species that has annual litters averaging three offspring each, and a semelparous species that has one litter of four, and then dies. These two species have the same rate of population growth, which suggests that even a tiny fecundity advantage of one additional offspring would favor the evolution of semelparity. This is known as Cole's Paradox.\n\nIn his analysis, Cole assumed that there was no mortality of individuals of the iteroparous species, even seedlings. Twenty years later, Charnov and Schaffer showed that reasonable differences in adult and juvenile mortality yield much more reasonable costs of semelparity, essentially solving Cole's paradox. An even more general demographic model was produced by Young.\n\nThese demographic models have been more successful than the other models when tested with real-world systems. It has been shown that semelparous species have higher expected adult mortality, making it more economical to put all reproductive effort into the first (and therefore final) reproductive episode.\n\nSemelparous species of this family are typically small and carnivorous, with the exception of the northern quoll (\"Dasyurus hallucatus\"), which is large. Species with this reproductive strategy include members of the genus \"Antechinus, Phascogale tapoatafa\" and \"Phascogale culura\". The males of all three groups exhibit similar characteristics that classify them as semelparous. First, all of the males disappear of each species disappear immediately after the mating season. Also, males that are captured and isolated from others live for 2 to 3 years. If these captured males are allowed to mate, they die immediately after the mating season, like those in the wild.Their behavior also changes drastically before and after the mating season. Before mating, males are extremely aggressive and will fight with other males if placed close together. Males that are captured before they are allowed to mate remain aggressive through the winter months. After the mating season, if allowed to mate, males become extremely lethargic and never regain their aggressiveness even if they survive to the next mating season. Other changes that occur post-mating include fur degradation and testicular degeneration. During adolescence, male fur is thick and becomes dull and thin after mating, but regains its original condition if the individual manages to survive past the mating season. The fur on the scrotum completely falls off and does not grow back, even if the male survives months after the first mating season. As the marsupial ages, its testicles grow until they reach a peak size and weight at the beginning of the mating season. After the individual mates, the weight and size of the testes and scrotum decrease. They remain small and do not produce spermatozoa later in life, if maintained in a laboratory. The 1966 Woolley study on \"Antechinus spp.\" noticed that males were only able to be maintained past mating in the laboratory and no senile males were found in the wild, suggesting that all males die shortly after mating. \n\nStudies on \"Antechinus stuartii\" reveal that male mortality is highly correlated to stress and andrenocortical activity. The study measured the corticosteroid concentration in males in the wild, males injected with cortisol, males injected with saline, and females in the wild. While both males and females exhibit high levels of corticosteroid concentration in the wild, this proves fatal only to males due to females having a higher maximum high affinity corticosteroid binding capacity (MCBC). Thus, free corticosteroid in the plasma of male \"A. stuartii\" rises sharply, while it remains constant in females. High levels of free corticosteroid, resulting from mating in wild males and injected cortisol in laboratory males, resulted in stomach ulcers, gastrointestinal hemorrhaging, and liver abscesses, all of which increased mortality. These side effects were not found in the males that were injected with saline, strengthening the hypothesis that high free corticosteroids results in higher morality in male \"Dasyurids\". A similar study on \"Phascogale calura\" showed that similar endocrine systemchanges happen in \"P. calura\" as \"A. stuartii\". This supports stress-induced mortality as a characteristic of small \"Dasyurid\" semelparity.\n\n\"Dasyurus hallucatus\", or the northern quoll, is a large \"Dasyurid\" and exhibits increased male mortality after the mating season. Unlike smaller \"Dasyurids\", male die-off in \"D. hallucatus\" is not due to endocrine system changes and there was no spermatogenic failure after the mating season ended. If male \"D. hallucatus\" survive past their first mating season, they may be able to engage in a second mating season. While the individuals in a 2001 study mostly died from vehicles or predation, researchers found evidence of physiological degradation in males, similar to the physiological degradation in small \"Dasyurids.\" This includes fur loss, parasite infestations, and weight loss. As the mating period went on, males became increasingly anemic, but the anemia was not due to ulceration or gastrointestinal bleeding. Lack of elevated cortisol levels during mating periods in \"D. hallucatus\" means that there is no current universal explanation for the mechanism behind increased male mortality in \"Dasyuridae.\" Post-reproductive senescence has also been proposed as an explanation. \n\nThe mouse opossum exhibits a semelparous reproductive strategy in males and females. Males disappear from their endemic area after the reproductive season (February-May). Males found months later (June-August) are of lighter body weight and the molar teeth are less worn down, suggesting these males belong to a different generation. There is a drop off in the female population, but during the months of July and August, evidence of a gap between generations like the male gap. There is also lower body weight and less molar wear observed in females found after August. This is further supported by the evidence that females that reproduce are not observed the following year. This species has been compared to a similarly related species \"Marmosa robinsoni\" and like \"M. incana\" in order to answer what would happen if a female that has reproduced were to survive to the next mating season. \"M. robinsoni\" has a monoestrus reproductive cycle, like \"M. incana\", and females are no longer fertile after 17 months so it is unlikely that females that survive past the drop off in female populations would be able to reproduce a second time.\n\nOther mouse opossums\n\n\"Gracilinanus microtarsus\", or the Brazilian gracile opossum, is considered to be partially semelparous because male mortality increases significantly after the mating season, but some males survive to mate again in the next reproductive cycle. The males also exhibit similar physiological degradation demonstrated in \"Antechinus\"and other semelparous marsupials such as fur loss and increase of infection from parasites.\n\nHighly elevated cortisol levels mediate the post-spawning death of semelparous \"Oncorhynchus\" Pacific salmon by causing tissue degeneration, suppressing the immune system, and impairing various homeostatic mechanisms. After swimming for such a long distance, salmon expend all of their energy on reproduction. One of the key factors in salmon rapid senescence is that these fish do not feed during reproduction so body weight is extremely reduced. In addition to physiological degradation, pacific salmon become more lethargic as mating goes on, which makes some individuals more susceptible to predation because they have less energy to avoid predators. This also increases mortality rates of adults post-mating. \n\nTraditionally, semelparity was usually defined within the time frame of a year. Critics of this criteria note that this scale is inappropriate in discussing patterns of insect reproduction because many insects breed more than once within one annual period, but generation times of less than one year. Under the traditional definition, insects are considered semelparous as a consequence of time scale rather than the distribution of reproductive effort over their adult life span. In order to resolve this inconsistency, Fritz \"et. al\" define semelparous insects as \"Insects that lay a single clutch of eggs in their lifetime and deposit them at one place are clearly semelparous or big bang reproducers. Their entire reproductive effort is committed at one time and they die shortly after oviposition\". Semelparous insects are found in Lepidoptera, Ephemeroptera, Dermaptera, Plecoptera, Strepsiptera, Trichoptera, and Homoptera. \n\nFemales of certain families of Lepidoptera, like the Gypsy Moth of \"Psychidae,\" have reduced mobility or apterous so the insects' dispersal is in the larval stage, as opposed to in the adult stage. In iteroparous insects, major dispersal occurs in the adult stage. All semelparous Lepidopterans share similar characteristics: Larva only feed in restricted periods of the year because of the nutritional state of their host plants (as a result, they are univoltine), initial food supply is predictably abundant, and larval host plants are abundant and adjacent. Death most commonly occurs by starvation. In the case of the gypsy moth, adults do not possess an active digestive system and cannot feed, but can drink moisture. Mating occurs fairly rapidly after adults emerge from their pupal form and, without a way to digest food, the adult moths die after about a week.\n\nThe evolution for semelparity in both sexes has occurred many times in plants, invertebrates, and fish. It is rare in mammals because mammals have obligate maternal care due to internal fertilization and incubation of offspring and nursing young after birth, which requires high maternal survival rate after fertilization and offspring weaning. Also, female mammals have relatively low reproductive rate compared to invertebrates or fish because they invest a lot of energy in maternal care. However, male reproductive rate is much less constrained in mammals because only females bear young. Males that die after one mating season can still produce a large number of offspring if he invests all of his energy in intense matings with many females.\n\nScientists have hypothesized that natural selection has allowed semelparity to evolved in \"Dasyuridae\" and \"Didelphidae\" because of certain ecological constraints. Female mammals ancestral to this these groups may have shortened their mating period to coincide with peak prey abundance. Because this window is so small, the females of these species exhibit a reproduction pattern where the estrous of all females occurs simultaneously. Selection would then favor aggressive males due to increased competition between males for access to females. Since the mating period is so short, it is more beneficial for males to expend all their energy on mating, even more so if they are unlikely to survive to the next mating season.\n\nReproduction is costly for anadromous salmonids because their life history requires transition from saltwater to freshwater streams and long migrations, which can be physiologically taxing. The transition between cold oceanic water to warm freshwater and steep elevation changes in Northern Paciﬁc rivers could explain the evolution of semelparity because it would be extremely difficult to return back to the ocean. A noticeable difference between semelparous fish and iteroparous salmonids is that egg size varies between the two types of reproductive strategies. Studies show that egg size is also affected by migration and body size. Egg number, however shows little variation between semelparous and iteroparous populations or between resident and anadromous populations for females of the same body size. The current hypothesis behind this reason is that iteroparous species reduce the size of their eggs in order to improve the mother's chances survival, since she invests less energy in gamete formation. Semelparous species do not expect to live past one mating season, so females invest a lot more energy in gamete formation resulting in large eggs. Anadromous salmonids may also have evolved semelparity to boost the nutrition density of the spawning grounds. The most productive Pacific salmon spawning grounds contain the most carcasses of spawned adults. The dead bodies of the adult salmon decompose and provide nitrogen and phosphorus for algae to grow in the nutrient-poor water. Zooplankton then feed on the algae, and newly-hatched salmon feed on the zooplankton.\n\nAn interesting trait has evolved in semelparous insects, especially in those that have evolved from parasitic ancestors, like in all subsocial and eusocial aculeate Hymenoptera. This is because larvae are morphologically specialized for development within a host’s innards and thus are entirely helpless outside of that environment. Females would need to invest a lot of energy in protecting their eggs and hatched offspring. They do this through such behaviors as egg guarding. Mothers that actively defend offspring, for example, risk injury or death by doing so. This is not beneficial in an iteroparous species because the female risks dying and not reaching her full reproductive potential by not being able to reproduce in all reproductive periods in her lifetime. Since semelparous insects only live for one reproductive cycle, they can afford to expend energy on maternal care because those offspring are her only offspring. An iteroparous insect does not need to expend energy on the eggs of one mating period because it is likely that she will mate again. There is ongoing research in maternal care in semelparous insects from lineages not descended from parasites to further understand this relationship between semelparity and maternal care. \n\n\n", "id": "22610793", "title": "Semelparity and iteroparity"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23428770", "text": "Associated reproductive pattern\n\nAn associated reproductive pattern is a seasonal change in reproduction which is highly correlated with a change in gonad and associated hormone.\n", "id": "23428770", "title": "Associated reproductive pattern"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23665572", "text": "Dispersal vector\n\nIn the biology of dispersal, a dispersal vector is \"an agent transporting seeds or other dispersal units\". Dispersal vectors may include biotic factors, such as animals, or abiotic factors, such as the wind or the ocean.\n\nHumans have been acting as dispersal vectors since we began moving around the planet, bringing non-native plants and animals with us. As trends in urbanization have increased, urban environments can act as staging grounds for species dispersal and invasion. Many non-native species exist in urban environments and the high rate of movement in an out of urban areas leads to a high level of dispersal to neighboring environments. \n\n", "id": "23665572", "title": "Dispersal vector"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3366914", "text": "Artificial reproduction\n\nArtificial reproduction/propagation is the creation of new life by other than the natural means available to an organism. Examples include artificial insemination, in vitro fertilization, cloning and embryonic splitting, or cleavage.\n\nCutting plants' stems and placing them in compost is also a form of artificial reproduction.\nWe can grow many plants from one plant by using the man-made methods. The process of growing many plants from one plant by man-made methods is called artificial propagation of plants. A number of methods of artificial propagation of plants are used in agriculture (for raising crops), and horticulture (cultivation of vegetables, fruits and flowers). The three common methods for the artificial propagation of plants are:\n\nWe will now describe all these methods, one by one. Let us start with the cuttings method for the artificial propagation of plants.\n\nA small part of a plant which is removed by making a cut with a sharp knife is called a 'cutting'. A cutting may be a piece of stem, root or even a leaf. While making a cut, care should be taken to see that there are some buds on it.\n\nIn this method, a small part of a plant is removed by making a cut with sharp knife.\n\nThe plants like rose, Bougainvillea, Chrysanthemum, grapes, sugarcane, bananas, and cactus, etc. can be grown by means of cuttings. For example, rose plants and chrysanthemums are propagated (or reproduced) by means c cuttings from stems (or shoots) as follows: A piece of stem (or side shoot) having bud is cut from an existing rose plant with the help of a knife. The lower part of this cutting is buried in moist soil. After a few days, the end of cutting buried in soil develops roots and later on grows to become a new rose plant. An advantage of cuttings method is that by using this method we can produce many new plants from just one plant quickly, without waiting for flowers and sexual reproduction.E.g.: Rose,Hibiscus\n\nIn this method, a branch of the plant is pulled towards the ground and a part of it is covered with moist soil leaving the tip of the branch exposed above the ground. After some time, new roots develop from the part of the branch buried in the soil. The branch is then cut off from the parent plant. The part of the branch which has developed roots grows to become a new plant (just like the parent plant). Jasmine plant (chameli) is propagated or produced by the layering method.\n\nWe can see from that one left side branch and one right side branch of the parent jasmine plant have been buried in moist soil. The parts of branches which are buried in soil grow their own roots. When this happens, the branches of the parent plant connecting the newly formed plants are cut off so that the newly formed plants may grow on their own and develop into mature plants (like the parent plant).\n\nMany plants like strawberry and raspberry are propagated by the natural layering method. The natural layering occurs because these plants form runners (which are soft horizontal stems running above the ground). Wherever the ends of such runners touch the ground, new plants are formed at those places. In this way, many more strawberry or raspberry plants are formed from\" the parent plant in a natural way.\n\nThe layering method is used for the propagation (or reproduction) of plants like : Jasmine, Strawberry, Raspberry, Lemon, Guava, Hibiscus (China rose), Bougainvillea and many slender ornamental plants.E.g.: Nerium\n\nGrafting is a method in which the cut stems of two different plants (one with roots and other without roots) are joined together in such a way that the two stems join and grow as a single plant. This new plant will have the characteristics of both the original plants.\n\nIn carrying out grafting, two plants (or trees) are chosen which are to be used as scion and stock. First, the stem (or branch) is removed from the plant chosen to be made scion (for its desirable characteristics) by making a slanting cut. This gives us the scion with a slanting cut. The stem of second plant (or tree) to be used in grafting is also cut in a slanting way. The lower part of this plant (or tree) is stock. It has also a slanting cut.\n\nThe scion is placed over the stock. The cut surfaces of the scion and stock are fitted together and bound tightly with a piece of cloth and covered properly with polythene sheet (so as to prevent harmful infection by bacteria or fungus, and loss of water and plant sap from the cut and joined ends of stock and scion).\n\nWhile joining the scion to the stock, care should be taken to make sure that the cambium layer of scion is in contact with the cambium layer of stock (because the cambium layer in the stem is responsible for growth).\n\nThe cut soon heals and the stock and scion of two plants grow together and become one plant. The scion continues to produce its original leaves, flowers and fruits but it gets water and minerals for making food from the chosen stock. So, the fruits will have the characteristics of both the plants (from which scion and stock have come).\n\nGrafting is used to breed fruit trees and flowering bushes. Apple, peach, apricot and pear trees are often grafted. We will now describe some of the advantages of the grafting method of artificial propagation.\n Grafting can be used to produce varieties of seedless fruits.\n\nArtificial vegetative propagation is usually used for the propagation (or reproduction) of those plants which produce either very few seeds or do not produce viable seeds. Some examples of such plants which are reproduced by artificial vegetative propagation methods are: Banana, Pineapple, Orange, Grape, Rose, etc.\n\nwww.cmf.org\n", "id": "3366914", "title": "Artificial reproduction"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=367639", "text": "Intra-species recognition\n\nIntra-species recognition is the recognition by a member of a species of a conspecific (another member of the same species). In many species, such recognition is necessary for procreation.\n\nDifferent species may employ different methods, but all of them are based on one or more senses (after all, this is how the organism gathers information about the environment). The recognition may happen by chemical signature (smell), by having a distinctive shape or color (sight), by emitting certain sounds (hearing), or even by behaviour patterns. Often a combination of these is used.\n\nAmong human beings, the sense of sight is usually in charge of recognizing other members of the same species, with maybe the subconscious help of smell. In particular, the human brain has a disproportionate amount of processing power dedicated to finely analyze the features of a human face. This is why we are able to distinguish basically all six billions of human beings from each other (barring look-alikes), and a human being from a similar species like some anthropomorphic ape, with only a quick glance.\n\nIntra-species recognition systems are often subtle. For example, ornithologists have great difficulty in distinguishing the chiffchaff from the willow warbler by eye, and there is no evidence that the birds themselves can do so other than by the different songs of the male. Sometimes, intra-species recognition is fallible: in many species of frog, the males are not uncommonly seen copulating with females of the wrong species or even with inanimate objects.\n\n\"Heliconius charithonia\" displays intra-species recognition by roosting with conspecifics. They do this with the help of UV rhodopsins in the eye that help them distinguish between ultraviolet yellow pigments and regular yellow pigments. They have also been known to emit chemical cues in order to recognize members of their own species.\n\n", "id": "367639", "title": "Intra-species recognition"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3294779", "text": "Somatic effort\n\nSomatic effort refers to the total investments of an organism in its own development, differentiation, and maintenance which consequently increases its reproductive potential.\n", "id": "3294779", "title": "Somatic effort"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1247702", "text": "Teleomorph, anamorph and holomorph\n\nIn mycology, the terms teleomorph, anamorph, and holomorph apply to portions of the life cycles of fungi in the phyla Ascomycota and Basidiomycota:\n\n\nFungi are classified primarily based on the structures associated with sexual reproduction, which tend to be conserved. However, many fungi reproduce only asexually, and cannot be easily placed in a classification based on sexual characters; some produce both asexual and sexual states. These problematic species are often members of the Ascomycota, but a few of them belong to the Basidiomycota. Even among fungi that reproduce both sexually and asexually, often only one method of reproduction can be observed at a specific point in time or under specific conditions. Additionally, fungi typically grow in mixed colonies and sporulate amongst each other. These facts have made it very difficult to link the various states of the same fungus.\n\nFungi that are not known to produce a teleomorph were historically placed into an artificial phylum, the \"Deuteromycota\", also known as \"Fungi Imperfecti\", simply for convenience. Some workers hold that this is an obsolete concept, and that molecular phylogeny allows accurate placement of species which are only known from part of their life cycle. Others retain the term deuteromycetes, but give it a lowercase \"d\" and no taxonomic rank.\n\nHistorically, Article 59 of the International Code of Botanical Nomenclature permitted mycologists to give asexually reproducing fungi (anamorphs) separate names from their sexual states (teleomorphs) but this practice was discontinued as of 1 January 2013.\n\nThe dual naming system can be confusing for novices. It is essential for workers in plant pathology, mold identification, medical mycology, and food microbiology, fields in which asexually reproducing fungi are commonly encountered.\n\nThe separate names for anamorphs of fungi with a pleomorphic life-cycle has been an issue of debate since the phenomenon was recognized in the mid-19th century. This was even before the first international rules for botanical nomenclature were issued in 1867. Special provisions are to be found in the earliest \"Codes\", which were then modified several times, and often substantially. The rules have been updated regularly and become increasingly complex, and by the mid-1970s they were being interpreted in different ways by different mycologists – even ones working on the same genus. Following intensive discussions under the auspices of the International Mycological Association, drastic changes were made at the International Botanical Congress in 1981 to clarify and simplify the procedures – and the now terms anamorph, teleomorph, and holomorph entered general use. An unfortunate effect of the simplification was that many name changes had to be made, including for some well-known and economically important species; at that date, the conservation of species names.\n\nUnforeseen in the 1970s, when the 1981 provisions were crafted, was the impact of molecular systematics. A decade later, it was starting to become obvious that fungi with no known sexual stage could confidently be placed in genera which were typified by species in which the sexual stage was known. This possibility of abandoning the dual nomenclatural system was debated at subsequent International Mycological Congresses and on other occasions, and the need for change was increasingly recognized. At the International Botanical Congress in Vienna in 2005, some minor modifications were made which allowed anamorph-typified names to be epitypified by material showing the sexual stage when it was discovered, and for that anamorph name to continue to be used.\n\nThe 1995 edition of the influential \"Ainsworth and Bisby’s Dictionary of the Fungi\" sought to replace the term anamorph with \"mitosporic fungus\" and teleomorph with \"meiosporic fungus\", based on the idea that the fundamental distinction is whether mitosis or meiosis preceded sporulation. This is a controversial choice because it is not clear that the morphological differences which traditionally define anamorphs and teleomorphs line up completely with sexual practices, or whether those sexual practices are sufficiently well understood in some cases.\n\nThe Vienna Congress (2005) established a Special Committee to investigate the issue further, but it was unable to reach a consensus. Matters were becoming increasingly desperate as mycologists using molecular phylogenetic approaches started to ignore the provisions, or interpret them in different ways.\n\nThe International Botanical Congress in Melbourne in July 2011 made a change in the \"International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants\" and adopted the principle \"one fungus, one name\". After 1 January 2013, one fungus can only have one name; the system of permitting separate names to be used for anamorphs then ended. This means that all legitimate names proposed for a species, regardless of what stage they are typified by, can serve as the correct name for that species.\n\nAll names now compete on an equal footing for priority, but in order not to render names for separate morphs as illegitimate, it was agreed that these should not be treated as superfluous alternative names in the sense of the \"Code\". It was further decided that anamorph-typified names should not be taken up to displace widely used teleomorph-typified names until the case has been considered by the General Committee established by the Congress. It was decided that lists of names can be submitted to the General Committee and, after due scrutiny, names accepted on those lists are to be treated as conserved over competing synonyms (and listed as appendices to the \"Code\"). Lichen-forming fungi (but not lichenicolous fungi) had always been excluded from the provisions permitting dual nomenclature.\n\n\nThis article incorporates CC-BY-3.0 text from the reference\n", "id": "1247702", "title": "Teleomorph, anamorph and holomorph"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1818326", "text": "Reproductive biology\n\nReproductive biology includes both sexual and asexual reproduction.\n\nReproductive biology includes a wide number of fields:\n\nHuman reproductive biology is primarily controlled through hormones, which send signals to the human reproductive structures to influence growth and maturation. These hormones are secreted by endocrine glands, and spread to different tissues in the human body. In humans, the pituitary gland synthesizes hormones used to control the activity of endocrine glands.\n\nInternal and external organs are included in the reproductive system. There are two reproductive systems including the male and female, which contain different organs from one another. These systems work together in order to produce offspring.\n\nThe female reproductive system includes the structures involved in ovulation, fertilization, development of an embryo, and birth.\n\nThese structures include:\n\nEstrogen is one of the sexual reproductive hormones that aid in the sexual reproductive system of the female.\n\nThe male reproductive system includes sex accessory glands, sex accessory ducts, testes, and external genitalia.\n\nTestosterone, although present in both males and females, is relatively more abundant in males. Testosterone serves as one of the sexual reproductive hormones in the male reproductive system.\n\nAnimal reproduction occurs by two modes of action, including both sexual and asexual reproduction. In asexual reproduction the generation of new organisms does not require the fusion sperm with an egg. However, in sexual reproduction new organisms are formed by the fusion of haploid sperm and eggs resulting in what is known as the zygote. Although animals exhibit both sexual and asexual reproduction the vast majority of animals reproduce by sexual reproduction.\n\nGametogenesis is the formation of gametes, or reproductive cells.\n\nSpermatogenesis is the production of sperm cells in the testis. In mature testes primordial germ cells divide mitotically to form the spermatogonia, which in turn generate spermatocytes by mitosis. Then each spermatocyte gives rise to four spermatids through meiosis. Spermatids are now haploid and undergo differentiation into sperm cells. Later in reproduction the sperm will fuse with a female oocyte to form the zygote.\n\nOogenesis is the formation of a cell who will produce one ovum and three polar bodies. Oogenesis begins in the female embryo with the production of oogonia from primordial germ cells. Like spermatogenesis, the primordial germ cell undergo mitotic division to form the cells that will later undergo meiosis, but will be halted at the prophase I stage. This is known as the primary oocyte. Human females are born with all the primary oocytes they will ever have. Starting at puberty the process of meiosis can complete resulting in the secondary oocyte and the first polar body. The secondary oocyte can later be fertilized with the male sperm.\n\n", "id": "1818326", "title": "Reproductive biology"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5402932", "text": "Megaspore\n\nMegaspores, also called macrospores, are a type of spore that is present in heterosporous plants. These plants have two spore types, megaspores and microspores. Generally speaking, the megaspore, or large spore, germinates into a female gametophyte, which produces egg cells. These are fertilized by sperm produced by the male gametophyte developing from the microspore. Heterosporous plants include the following:\n\n\nIn gymnosperms and flowering plants, the megaspore is produced inside the nucleus of the ovule. During megasporogenesis, a diploid precursor cell, the megasporocyte or megaspore mother cell, undergoes meiosis to produce initially four haploid cells (the megaspores). Angiosperms exhibit three patterns of megasporogenesis: monosporic, bisporic, and tetrasporic, also known as the Polygonum type, the Alisma type, and the Drusa type, respectively. The monosporic pattern occurs most frequently (>70% of angiosperms) and is found in many economically and biologically important groups such as Brassicaceae (e.g., \"Arabidopsis\", \"Capsella\", \"Brassica\"), Gramineae (e.g., maize, rice, wheat), Malvaceae (e.g., cotton), Leguminoseae (e.g., beans, soybean), and Solanaceae (e.g., pepper, tobacco, tomato, potato, petunia).\n\nThis pattern is characterized by cell plate formation after meiosis 1 & 2, which results in four one-nucleate megaspores, of which three degenerate. The bisporic pattern is characterized by cell plate formation only after meiosis 1, and results in two two-nucleate megaspores, of which one degenerates. The tetrasporic pattern is characterized by cell plates failing to form after either meiosis 1 or 2, and results in one four-nucleate megaspore. Therefore, each pattern gives rise to a single functional megaspore which contains one, two, or four meiotic nuclei, respectively. The megaspore then undergoes megagametogenesis to give rise to the female gametophyte.\n\nAfter megasporogenesis, the megaspore develops into the female gametophyte (the embryo sac) in a process called megagametogenesis. The process of megagametogenesis varies depending on which pattern of megasporogenesis occurred. Some species, such as \"Tridax trilobata\", \"Ehretia laevis\", and \"Alectra thomsoni\", can undergo different patterns of megasporogenesis and therefore different patterns of megagametogenesis. \nIf the monosporic pattern occurred, the single nucleus undergoes mitosis three times, producing an eight-nucleate cell. These eight nuclei are arranged into two groups of four. These groups both send a nucleus to the center of the cell; these become the polar nuclei. Depending on the species, these nuclei fuse together before or upon fertilization of the central cell. The three nuclei at the end of the cell near the micropylar become the egg apparatus, with an egg cell in the center and two synergids. At the other end of the cell, a cell wall forms around the nuclei and forms the antipodals. Therefore, the resulting embryo sac is a seven-celled structure consisting of one central cell, one egg cell, two synergid cells, and three antipodal cells.\nThe bisporic and tetrasporic patterns undergo varying processes and result in varying embryo sacs as well. In \"Lilium\" which has a tetrasporic pattern, the central cell of the embryo sac is 4N. Therefore, upon fertilization the endosperm will be 5N rather than the typical 3N.\n", "id": "5402932", "title": "Megaspore"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3288573", "text": "Biotic potential\n\nBiotic potential is described by the unrestricted growth of populations resulting in the maximum growth of that population. \nBiotic potential is the highest possible vital index of a species; therefore, when the species has its highest birthrate and lowest mortality rate.\n\nThe biotic potential is the quantitative expression of the ability of a species to face selection in any environment. The main equilibrium of a particular population is described by the equation:\n\nChapman also relates to a \"vital index\", regarding a ratio to find the rate of surviving members of a species, whereas;\n\nAccording to the ecologist R.N Chapman (1928), the biotic potential could be divided into a reproductive and survival potential. The survival potential could in turn be divided into nutritive and protective potentials.\n\nReproductive potential (potential natality) is the upper limit to biotic potential in the absence of mortality. Survival potential is the reciprocal of mortality. Because reproductive potential does not account for the number of gametes surviving, survival potential is a necessary component of biotic potential. In the absence of mortality, biotic potential = reproductive potential.\n\nChapman also identified two additional components of nutritive and protective potentials as divisions of the survival potential. Nutritive potential is the ability to acquire and use food for growth and energy. Protective potential is described by the ability of the organism to protect itself against the dynamic forces of environment in order to insure successful reproduction and offspring.\n\nFull expression of the biotic potential of an organism is restricted by environmental resistance, any condition that inhibits the increase in number of the population. It is generally only reached when environmental conditions are very favorable. A species reaching its biotic potential would exhibit exponential population growth and be said to have a high fertility, that is, how many offspring are produced per mother.\n", "id": "3288573", "title": "Biotic potential"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66535", "text": "Alternation of generations\n\nAlternation of generations (also known as metagenesis) is the type of life cycle that occurs in those plants and algae in the Archaeplastida and the Heterokontophyta that have distinct sexual haploid and asexual diploid stages. In these groups, a multicellular gametophyte, which is haploid with \"n\" chromosomes, alternates with a multicellular sporophyte, which is diploid with 2\"n\" chromosomes, made up of \"n\" pairs. A mature sporophyte produces spores by meiosis, a process which reduces the number of chromosomes to half, from 2\"n\" to \"n\". \n\nThe haploid spores germinate and grow into a haploid gametophyte. At maturity, the gametophyte produces gametes by mitosis, which does not alter the number of chromosomes. Two gametes (originating from different organisms of the same species or from the same organism) fuse to produce a zygote, which develops into a diploid sporophyte. This cycle, from gametophyte to gametophyte (or equally from sporophyte to sporophyte), is the way in which all land plants and many algae undergo sexual reproduction.\n\nThe relationship between the sporophyte and gametophyte varies among different groups of plants. In those algae which have alternation of generations, the sporophyte and gametophyte are separate independent organisms, which may or may not have a similar appearance. In liverworts, mosses and hornworts, the sporophyte is less well developed than the gametophyte and is largely dependent on it. Although moss and hornwort sporophytes can photosynthesise, they require additional photosynthate from the gametophyte to sustain growth and spore development and depend on it for supply of water, mineral nutrients and nitrogen. By contrast, in all modern vascular plants the gametophyte is less well developed than the sporophyte, although their Devonian ancestors had gametophytes and sporophytes of approximately equivalent complexity. In ferns the gametophyte is a small flattened autotrophic prothallus on which the young sporophyte is briefly dependent for its nutrition. In flowering plants, the reduction of the gametophyte is much more extreme; it consists of just a few cells which grow entirely inside the sporophyte.\n\nAnimals develop differently. They directly produce haploid gametes. No haploid spores capable of dividing are produced, so they do not have a haploid gametophyte alternating with a diploid sporophyte. (Some insects have a sex-determining system whereby haploid males are produced from unfertilized eggs; however the females are diploid.)\n\nLife cycles of plants and algae with alternating haploid and diploid multicellular stages are referred to as diplohaplontic (the equivalent terms haplodiplontic, diplobiontic or dibiontic are also in use). Life cycles, such as those of animals, in which there is only a diploid multicellular stage are referred to as diplontic. Life cycles in which there is only a haploid multicellular stage are referred to as haplontic.\n\nAlternation of generations is defined as the alternation of multicellular diploid and haploid forms in the organism's life cycle, regardless of whether or not these forms are free-living. In some species, such as the alga \"Ulva lactuca\", the diploid and haploid forms are indeed both free-living independent organisms, essentially identical in appearance and therefore said to be isomorphic. The free-swimming, haploid gametes form a diploid zygote which germinates into a multicellular diploid sporophyte. The sporophyte produces free-swimming haploid spores by meiosis that germinate into haploid gametophytes.\n\nHowever, in some other groups, either the sporophyte or the gametophyte is very much reduced and is incapable of free living. For example, in all bryophytes the gametophyte generation is dominant and the sporophyte is dependent on it. By contrast, in all modern vascular land plants the gametophytes are strongly reduced, although the fossil evidence indicates that they were derived from isomorphic ancestors. In seed plants, the female gametophyte develops totally within the sporophyte which protects and nurtures it and the embryo sporophyte that it produces. The pollen grains, which are the male gametophytes, are reduced to only a few cells (just three cells in many cases). Here the notion of two generations is less obvious; as Bateman & Dimichele say \"[s]porophyte and gametophyte effectively function as a single organism\". The alternative term 'alternation of phases' may then be more appropriate.\n\nDebates about alternation of generations in the early twentieth century can be confusing because various ways of classifying \"generations\" co-exist (sexual vs. asexual, gametophyte vs. sporophyte, haploid vs. diploid, etc.).\n\nInitially, Chamisso and Steenstrup described the succession of differently organized generations (sexual and asexual) in animals as \"alternation of generations\", while studying the development of tunicates, cnidarians and trematode animals. This phenomenon is also known as heterogamy. Presently, the term \"alternation of generations\" is almost exclusively associated with the life cycles of plants, specifically with the alternation of haploid gametophytes and diploid sporophytes.\n\nWilhelm Hofmeister demonstrated the morphological alternation of generations in plants, between a spore-bearing generation (sporophyte) and a gamete-bearing generation (gametophyte). By that time, a debate emerged focusing on the origin of the asexual generation of land plants (i.e., the sporophyte) and is conventionally characterized as a conflict between theories of antithetic (Čelakovský, 1874) and homologous (Pringsheim, 1876) alternation of generations. Čelakovský coined the words sporophyte and gametophyte.\n\nEduard Strasburger (1874) discovered the alternation between diploid and haploid nuclear phases, also called cytological alternation of nuclear phases. Although most often coinciding, morphological alternation and nuclear phases alternation are sometimes independent of one another, e.g., in many red algae, the same nuclear phase may correspond to two diverse morphological generations. In some ferns which lost sexual reproduction, there is no change in nuclear phase, but the alternation of generations is maintained.\n\nThe diagram above shows the fundamental elements of the alternation of generations in plants. The many variations found in different groups of plants are described by use of these concepts later in the article. Starting from the right of the diagram, the processes involved are as follows:\n\nThe 'alternation of generations' in the life cycle is thus between a diploid (2\"n\") generation of sporophytes and a haploid (\"n\") generation of gametophytes.\nThe situation is quite different from that in animals, where the fundamental process is that a diploid (2\"n\") individual directly produces haploid (\"n\") gametes by meiosis. Spores (i.e. haploid cells which are able to undergo mitosis) are not produced, so neither is an asexual multi-cellular generation that alternates with a sexual multi-cellular generation. (Some insects have haploid males that develop from unfertilized eggs, but the females are all diploid.)\n\nThe diagram shown above is a good representation of the life cycle of some multi-cellular algae (e.g. the genus \"Cladophora\") which have sporophytes and gametophytes of almost identical appearance and which do not have different kinds of spores or gametes.\n\nHowever, there are many possible variations on the fundamental elements of a life cycle which has alternation of generations. Each variation may occur separately or in combination, resulting in a bewildering variety of life cycles. The terms used by botanists in describing these life cycles can be equally bewildering. As Bateman and Dimichele say \"[...] the alternation of generations has become a terminological morass; often, one term represents several concepts or one concept is represented by several terms.\"\n\nPossible variations are:\n\nThere are some correlations between these variations, but they are just that, correlations, and not absolute. For example, in flowering plants, microspores ultimately produce microgametes (sperm) and megaspores ultimately produce megagametes (eggs). However, in ferns and their allies there are groups with undifferentiated spores but differentiated gametophytes. For example, the fern \"Ceratopteris thalictrioides\" has spores of only one kind, which vary continuously in size. Smaller spores tend to germinate into gametophytes which produce only sperm-producing antheridia.\n\nThe diagram shows the alternation of generations in a species which is heteromorphic, sporophytic, oogametic, dioicous, heterosporic and dioecious. A seed plant example might be a willow tree (most species of the genus \"Salix\" are dioecious). Starting in the centre of the diagram, the processes involved are:\n\nThe term \"plants\" is taken here to mean the Archaeplastida, i.e. the glaucophytes, red and green algae and land plants.\n\nAlternation of generations occurs in almost all multicellular red and green algae, both freshwater forms (such as \"Cladophora\") and seaweeds (such as \"Ulva\"). In most, the generations are homomorphic (isomorphic) and free-living. Some species of red algae have a complex triphasic alternation of generations, in which there is a gametophyte phase and two distinct sporophyte phases. For further information, see Red algae: Reproduction.\n\nLand plants all have heteromorphic (anisomorphic) alternation of generations, in which the sporophyte and gametophyte are distinctly different. All bryophytes, i.e. liverworts, mosses and hornworts, have the gametophyte generation as the most conspicuous. As an illustration, consider a monoicous moss. Antheridia and archegonia develop on the mature plant (the gametophyte). In the presence of water, the biflagellate sperm from the antheridia swim to the archegonia and fertilisation occurs, leading to the production of a diploid sporophyte. The sporophyte grows up from the archegonium. Its body comprises a long stalk topped by a capsule within which spore-producing cells undergo meiosis to form haploid spores. Most mosses rely on the wind to disperse these spores, although \"Splachnum sphaericum\" is entomophilous, recruiting insects to disperse its spores. For further information, see Liverwort: Life cycle, Moss: Life cycle, Hornwort: Life cycle.\n\nIn ferns and their allies, including clubmosses and horsetails, the conspicuous plant observed in the field is the diploid sporophyte. The haploid spores develop in sori on the underside of the fronds and are dispersed by the wind (or in some cases, by floating on water). If conditions are right, a spore will germinate and grow into a rather inconspicuous plant body called a prothallus. The haploid prothallus does not resemble the sporophyte, and as such ferns and their allies have a heteromorphic alternation of generations. The prothallus is short-lived, but carries out sexual reproduction, producing the diploid zygote that then grows out of the prothallus as the sporophyte. For further information, see Fern: Life cycle.\n\nIn the spermatophytes, the seed plants, the sporophyte is the dominant multicellular phase; the gametophytes are strongly reduced in size and very different in morphology. The entire gametophyte generation, with the sole exception of pollen grains (microgametophytes), is contained within the sporophyte. The life cycle of a dioecious flowering plant (angiosperm), the willow, has been outlined in some detail in an earlier section (A complex life cycle). The life cycle of a gymnosperm is similar. However, flowering plants have in addition a phenomenon called 'double fertilization'. Two sperm nuclei from a pollen grain (the microgametophyte), rather than a single sperm, enter the archegonium of the megagametophyte; one fuses with the egg nucleus to form the zygote, the other fuses with two other nuclei of the gametophyte to form 'endosperm', which nourishes the developing embryo. For further information, see Double fertilization.\n\nIt has been proposed that the basis for the emergence of the diploid phase of the life cycle (sporophyte) as the dominant phase (e.g. as in vascular plants) is that diploidy allows masking of the expression of deleterious mutations through genetic complementation. Thus if one of the parental genomes in the diploid cells contained mutations leading to defects in one or more gene products, these deficiencies could be compensated for by the other parental genome (which nevertheless may have its own defects in other genes). As the diploid phase was becoming predominant, the masking effect likely allowed genome size, and hence information content, to increase without the constraint of having to improve accuracy of DNA replication. The opportunity to increase information content at low cost was advantageous because it permitted new adaptations to be encoded. This view has been challenged, with evidence showing that selection is no more effective in the haploid than in the diploid phases of the lifecycle of mosses and angiosperms.\n\nSome organisms currently classified in the clade Rhizaria and thus not plants in the sense used here, exhibit alternation of generations. Foraminifera undergo a heteromorphic alternation of generations between haploid gamont and diploid agamont forms. The single-celled haploid organism is typically much larger than the diploid organism.\n\nFungal mycelia are typically haploid. When mycelia of different mating types meet, they produce two multinucleate ball-shaped cells, which join via a \"mating bridge\". Nuclei move from one mycelium into the other, forming a heterokaryon (meaning \"different nuclei\"). This process is called plasmogamy. Actual fusion to form diploid nuclei is called karyogamy, and may not occur until sporangia are formed. Karogamy produces a diploid zygote, which is a short-lived sporophyte that soon undergoes meiosis to form haploid spores. When the spores germinate, they develop into new mycelia.\n\nThe life cycle of slime moulds is very similar to that of fungi. Haploid spores germinate to form swarm cells or myxamoebae. These fuse in a process referred to as \"plasmogamy\" and \"karyogamy\" to form a diploid zygote. The zygote develops into a plasmodium, and the mature plasmodium produces, depending on the species, one to many fruiting bodies containing haploid spores.\n\nAlternation between a multicellular diploid and a multicellular haploid generation is never encountered in animals. In some animals, there is an alternation between parthenogenic and sexually reproductive phases (heterogamy). Both phases are diploid. This has sometimes been called \"alternation of generations\", but is quite different. In some other animals, such as hymenopterans, males are haploid and females diploid, but this is always the case rather than there being an alternation between distinct generations.\n\n\n", "id": "66535", "title": "Alternation of generations"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28200580", "text": "Oocyte selection\n\nOocyte selection is a procedure that is performed prior to in vitro fertilization, in order to use oocytes with maximal chances of resulting in pregnancy. In contrast, embryo selection takes place \"after\" fertilization.\n\nChromosomal evaluation may be performed. Embryos from rescued in vitro-matured metaphase II (IVM-MII) oocytes show significantly higher fertilization rates and more blastomeres per embryo compared with those from arrested metaphase I (MI) oocytes (58.5% vs. 43.9% and 5.7 vs. 5.0, respectively).\n\nAlso, morphological features of the oocyte that can be obtained by standard light or polarized light microscopy. However, there is no clear tendency in recent publications to a general increase in predictive value of morphological features. Suggested techniques include \"zona pellucida imaging\", which can detect differences in birefringence between eggs, which is a predictor of compaction, blastulation and pregnancy.\n\nPotentially, polar body biopsy may be used for molecular analysis, and can be used for preimplantation genetic screening.\n", "id": "28200580", "title": "Oocyte selection"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32398910", "text": "Paratomy\n\nParatomy is a form of asexual reproduction in animals where the organism splits in a plane perpendicular to the antero-posterior axis and the split is preceded by the \"pregeneration\" of the anterior structures in the posterior portion.The developing organisms have their body axis aligned i.e. they develop in a head to tail fashion.\n\nBudding can be considered to be similar to paratomy except that the body axes need not be aligned: the new head may grow toward the side or even point backward (e.g. \"Convolutriloba retrogemma\" an acoel flat worm). In animals that undergo fast paratomy a chain of zooids packed in a head to tail formation may develop. Many oligochete annelids, acoelous turbellarians, echinoderm larvae and coelenterates reproduce by this method.\n\n\nThis paper has a detailed description of the changes during paratomy.\n", "id": "32398910", "title": "Paratomy"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15213586", "text": "Operational sex ratio\n\nIn the evolutionary biology of sexual reproduction, operational sex ratio (OSR) is the ratio of sexually competing males that are ready to mate to sexually competing females that are ready to mate, or alternatively the local ratio of fertilizable females to sexually active males at any given time. Its difference from the physical sex ratio, is that it does not take into account sexually inactive or non-competitive individuals (individuals that do not compete for mates).\n\nThe theory of OSR hypothesizes that the operational sex ratio affects the mating competition of males and females in a population. This concept is especially useful in the study of sexual selection since it is a measure of how intense sexual competition is in a species, and also in the study of the relationship of sexual selection to sexual dimorphism. The OSR is closely linked to the \"potential rate of reproduction\" of the two sexes; that is, how fast they each could reproduce in ideal circumstances. Usually variation in potential reproductive rates creates bias in the OSR and this in turn will affect the strength of selection. The OSR is said to be biased toward a particular sex when sexually ready members of that sex are more abundant. For example, a male-biased OSR means that there are more sexually competing males than sexually competing females.\n\nThe operational sex ratio is affected by the length of time each sex spends in caring for young or in recovering from mating. For example, if females cease mating activity to care for young, but males do not, then more males would be ready to mate, thus creating a male biased OSR. One aspect of gestation and recovery time would be clutch loss. Clutch loss is when offspring or a group of offspring is lost, due to an accident, predation, etc. This, in turn, effects how long reproductive cycles will be in both males and females. If the males were to invest more time in the care of their offspring, they would be spending less time mating. This pushes the population towards a female biased OSR and vice versa. Whether or not it is the males or females investing more care in their offspring, if they were to lose their offspring for whatever reason, this would then change the OSR to be less biased because the once occupied sex becomes available to mate again.\n\nAs aforementioned, another major factor that influences OSR is potential rate of reproduction (PRR). Any sexual differences in the PRR will also change the OSR, so it is important to look at factors that change PRR as well. These include constraints to environmental factors such as food or nesting sites. For example, if males are required to provide a nutrient high gift before mating (most likely food) then when nutrients available is high, the OSR will be male biased because there is plenty of nutrients available to provide gifts. However, if nutrients is low, less males will be ready to reproduce, causing the population to have a female biased OSR. Another example would be if, in a certain species, males provided care for offspring and a nest. If the availability of nesting sites decreased, we would see the population trend towards a more female biased OSR because only a small number of males actually have a nest while all the females, regardless of a nest or not, are still producing eggs.\n\nA major factor that OSR can predict is the opportunity for sexual selection. As the OSR becomes more biased, the sex that is in excess will tend to undergo more competition for mates and therefore undergo strong sexual selection.\nIntensity of competition is also a factor that can be predicted by OSR. According to sexual selection theory, whichever sex is more abundant is expected to compete more strongly and the sex that is less abundant is expected to be \"choosier\" in who they decide to mate with. It would be expected that when an OSR is more biased to one sex than the other, that one would observe more interaction and competition from the sex that is more available to mate. When the population is more female biased, more female-female competition is observed and the opposite is seen for a male population where a male biased would cause more male-male interaction and competitiveness. Though both sexes may be competing for mates, it is important to remember that the biased OSR predicts which sex is the predominant competitor (the sex that exhibits the most competition). OSR can also predict what will happen to mate guarding in a population. As OSR becomes more biased to one sex, it can be observed that mate-guarding will increase. This is likely due to the fact that rival numbers (number of a certain sex that are also ready to mate) are increased. If a population is male biased then there are a lot more rival males to compete for a mate, meaning that those who have a mate already are more likely to guard the mate that they have.\n\n", "id": "15213586", "title": "Operational sex ratio"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34133981", "text": "Autotoky\n\nAutotoky is uniparental reproduction by self-fertilization or by parthenogenesis. The word comes from the Greek words \"auto\" meaning self and \"tokos\" meaning birth.\n", "id": "34133981", "title": "Autotoky"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35574369", "text": "Products of conception\n\nProducts of conception, abbreviated POC, is a medical term used for the tissue derived from the union of an egg and a sperm. It encompasses anembryonic gestation (blighted ovum) which does not have a viable embryo.\n\nIn the context of tissue from a dilation and curettage, the presence of POC essentially excludes an ectopic pregnancy.\n\n\"Retained products of conception\" is where products of conception remain in the uterus after childbirth, medical abortion or spontaneous abortion (colloquially known as miscarriage). Miscarriage with retained products of conception is termed \"delayed\" when no or very little products of conception have been passed, and \"incomplete\" when some products have been passed but some still remain \"in utero\".\n\nThe diagnosis is based on clinical presentation, quantitative HCG, ultrasound, and pathologic evaluation. A solid, heterogeneous, echogenic mass has a positive predictive value of 80%, but is present in only a minority of cases. A thickened endometrium of > 10 mm is usually considered abnormal, though no consensus exists on the appropriate cutoff. A cut-off of 8 mm or more has 34% positive rate, while a cut off of 14 mm or more has 85% sensitivity, 64% specificity for the diagnosis. Color Doppler flow in the endometrial canal can increased confidence in the diagnosis, though its absence does not exclude it, as 40% of cases of retained products have little or no flow. The differential in suspected cases includes uterine atony, blood clot, gestational trophoblastic disease, and normal post partum appearance of the uterus. Post partum blood clot is more common, reported in up to 24% of postpartum patients, and tends to be more hypoechoic than retained products with absent color flow on Doppler, and resolving spontaneously on follow up scans. The presence of gas raises the possibility of post partum endometritis, though this can also be seen in up to 21% of normal post pregnancy states. The normal post partum uterus is usually less than 2 cm in thickness, and continues to involute on follow up scans to 7 mm or less over time. Retained products are not uncommon, occurring in approximately 1% of all pregnancies, though it more common following abortions, either elective or spontaneous. There is significant overlap between appearance of a normal post partum uterus and retained products. If there is no endometrial canal mass or fluid, and endometrial thickness is less than 10 mm and without increased flow, retained products are statistically unlikely.\n\nAccording to the 2006 WHO \"Frequently asked clinical questions about medical abortion\", the presence of remaining products of conception in the uterus (as detected by obstetric ultrasonography) after a medical abortion is \"not\" an indication for surgical intervention (that is, vacuum aspiration or dilation and curettage). Remaining products of conception will be expelled during subsequent vaginal bleeding. Still, surgical intervention may be carried out on the woman's request, if the bleeding is heavy or prolonged, or causes anemia, or if there is evidence of endometritis.\n\nIn delayed miscarriage (also called missed abortion), the Royal Women's Hospital recommendations of management depend on the findings in ultrasonography:\n\nIn incomplete miscarriage, the Royal Women's Hospital recommendations of management depend on the findings in ultrasonography:\n\n", "id": "35574369", "title": "Products of conception"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35646178", "text": "Homogamy (biology)\n\nHomogamy is used in biology in three separate senses: \n", "id": "35646178", "title": "Homogamy (biology)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23803009", "text": "Opportunistic breeder\n\nFlexible or opportunistic breeders mate whenever the conditions of their environment become favorable. Their ability and motivation to mate are primarily independent of day-length (photoperiod) and instead rely on cues from short-term changes in local conditions like rainfall, food abundance and temperature. Another factor is the presence of suitable breeding sites, which may only form with heavy rain or other environmental changes.\n\nThus, they are distinct from seasonal breeders that rely on changes in day length to induce entry into estrus and to cue mating, and continuous breeders like humans that can mate year-round. Other categories of breeders that perhaps can be subdivided under the heading \"opportunistic\" have been used to describe many species, such as many that are anurans like frogs. These include sporadic wet and sporadic dry, describing animals that breed sporadically not always under favorable conditions of rain or lack thereof.\n\nMany opportunistic breeders are non-mammals. Those that are mammals tend to be small rodents.\n\nSince changes in season can coincide with favorable changes in environment, the distinction between seasonal breeder and opportunistic can be muddled. In equatorial climes, the change in seasons is not always perceptible and thus, changes in day length not remarkable. Thus, the tree kangaroo (Dendrolagus) previously categorized as a seasonal breeder is now suspected to be an opportunistic breeder.\n\nAdditionally, opportunists can have qualities of seasonal breeders. The red crossbill exhibits a preference (not a requirement) for long-day seasonality, but requires other factors, especially food abundance and social interactions, in order to breed. Conversely, food availability by itself incompletely promotes reproductive development.\n\nOpportunistic breeders are typically capable of breeding at any time or becoming fertile within a short period of time. An example is the golden spiny mouse where changes in dietary salt in its desert habitat due to rainfall appear to cue reproductive function. Increased levels of salinity in drying vegetation cause females to experience a reproductive hiatus.\n\nWhile reproduction is generally independent of photoperiod, animals can still experience reduced fertility with changes in day-length.\n\n\n\nFrogs and toads including:\n\n", "id": "23803009", "title": "Opportunistic breeder"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37289928", "text": "Worker policing\n\nWorker policing is a behavior seen in colonies of social hymenopterans (ants, bees, and wasps) whereby worker females eat or remove eggs that have been laid by other workers rather than those laid by a queen. Worker policing ensures that the offspring of the queen will predominate in the group. In certain species of bees, ants and wasps, workers or the queen may also act aggressively towards fertile workers. Worker policing has been suggested as a form of coercion to promote the evolution of altruistic behavior in eusocial insect societies.\n\nProposed mechanisms for the recognition of worker-laid eggs or active reproductive workers include marker hydrocarbons on the surface of queen-laid eggs, cuticle hydrocarbons on reproductive workers, and recognition of nest-mates. In rare cases, worker-laid eggs carry mimicked queen hydrocarbons and escape policing, a condition known as the anarchic syndrome.\n\nNot all forms of policing require the presence of a queen; it also occurs in a few species of ants which establish a dominance hierarchy of reproductive female workers, where top-ranking individuals reproduce.\n\nIn many social insect communities, sex is determined through haplodiploidy. Haploid male drones develop from unfertilized eggs while diploid females develop from fertilized eggs. Queens of a colony may mate with one or several drones. On average, a queen shares half of her genes with her sons, but only shares a quarter of her genes with the sons of fertile female workers. Therefore, it is in the queen's best interests to have her own sons raised, and not the sons of workers. Workers can reproduce in many ants, bees, and wasps because male offspring come from unfertilized eggs.\n\nBy contrast, the worker shares half of her genes with her sons and only a quarter with her brothers. Furthermore, the workers in colonies with a single once-mated queen are related to their nephews by three eighths, higher than they are related to brothers. This results in a conflict where the queen and worker females are at odds over the proportion of male offspring they contribute, since each side tries to maximize its reproductive fitness. Queens favor production of their own sons while workers favor production of their own sons, and do not stop their sisters from laying because of the favorable relatedness to nephews.\n\nWorker policing occurs when worker bees in the colony are genetically more closely related to the queen than the reproductive female. In many instances, the eggs of the female worker are eaten, or she is repeatedly attacked by other workers. This mechanism of egg removal ensures that the queen's sons predominate.\n\nExperiments confirming the role of kin selection in worker policing demonstrate the effects of multiple matings, which can lead to lower average relatedness between workers. Queens of the social wasp \"Dolichovespula saxonica\" mate singly or multiply. Researchers who study these wasps have observed a strong positive correlation between worker relatedness and male production. After controlling for the absolute number of eggs laid, these scientists conclude that the queen's multiple matings favor mutual worker policing.\n\nAlthough early theories of worker policing focused on the kin selection component, evidence from honey bees suggests that altruism is sometimes enforced. Fewer workers reproduce as policing effectiveness rises, and policing effectiveness decreases with increasing relatedness except in colonies with no queen. This suggests that worker policing is a social sanction imposed on selfish individuals.\n\nMechanisms suggested for egg discrimination in worker policing include queen hydrocarbons, fertile worker hydrocarbons, and nestmate recognition.\n\nA study on the carpenter ant \"Camponotus floridanus\" found a special surface hydrocarbon on queen-laid eggs. Workers in the colony with the queen's eggs refrained from egg-laying, whereas other groups that did not have queen-laid eggs showed worker reproduction. Thus, the hydrocarbon could act as a signal to alert workers to halt reproduction. More generally, however, the authors concluded that the hydrocarbons were a fertility signal. It is still unknown as to how the decision to restrain reproduction occurs or what minimum threshold of fertility in the queen is needed to reduce worker reproduction.\n\nThe study of cuticle hydrocarbons has also been applied to the reproductive workers. In some colonies of the ponerine ant \"Platythyrea punctata\", the presence of CHCs in new reproductive workers triggered aggressive behavior from the rest of the colony, often between new and old reproductive workers. Specifically, the old reproductive workers rubbed a marker hydrocarbon on the antennae of the new females, identifying them as rivals and targets for aggression.\n\nIn contrast to the other ant species, worker policing in the ant \"Formica fusca\" appears to incorporate nestmate recognition in addition to the queen hydrocarbons. Workers displayed higher levels of aggression toward non-nest mates and also removed some queen-laid eggs. Thus, queen hydrocarbons were not the only contributor to discrimination of the eggs.\n\nWorker policing has evolved convergently in several social insect species. The following cases are examples:\n\nOne of the first examples of worker policing to be discovered was in the honey bee, \"Apis mellifera\". Worker policing is prevalent in most honey bee colonies, and worker reproduction is minimal (0.12%) in this species. Worker policing occurs via egg-eating (oophagy) in \"Apis mellifera\" colonies. In many of these hives, the activation of ovaries in fertile females is diminished, suggesting that there are disincentives to laying eggs.\n\nWorkers in colonies of the Asian honey bee, \"Apis florea\", are also reported to engage in oophagy. Using microsatellite analysis, researchers concluded that no mature drones had non-queen alleles in the colonies they investigated. Thus, even though workers had activated ovaries and were capable of laying eggs, worker policing ensured the functional sterility of otherwise fertile workers.\nA higher percentage of female workers of the bee species \"Apis cerana\" are reported to activate their ovaries than those of \"Apis mellifera\" or \"Apis florea\". When queens were removed, up to 40% of the workers activated their ovaries in subsequent days. However, policing workers continued to eat the worker-laid eggs, suggesting that the mechanism of policing in this species does not involve direct intervention from the queen.\n\nThe observation that all these Apis species engage in polyandry has led researchers to conclude that worker policing is plesiomorphic for the Apis genus.\n\nWorker policing also occurs in the primitively eusocial bumblebees such as \"Bombus terrestris\".\n\nIn colonies of the ponerine ant, \"Pachycondyla inversa,\" workers eat the eggs of fertile female workers, known as gamergates, and display aggressive behavior towards egg-laying females.\n\nIn colonies of the ant \"Gnamptogenys menadensis\", workers will sometimes mate and lay eggs while others remain as virgins to lay trophic eggs to be used as food. In a display of policing, workers can immobilize female reproductive workers by biting their limbs; it is reported that 50% of the victims die from this treatment. The attacking workers may also drag offending workers outside the colony. Since workers can lay both male and female eggs, worker policing could be favored as the cost to the community is large. \nThe ant species \"Aphaenogaster smythiesi japonica\" also display evidence of policing. When researchers separated and then reunited workers from colonies that did or did not have queens, workers from the queen-containing colonies attacked the workers with activated ovaries from the queenless colonies.\n\nIn the queenless ant \"Streblognathus peetersi\", policing helps to select gamergates. The workers immobilize gamergates with lowered fertility, enabling high-ranking workers to take over as new gamergates.\n\nIn the ponerine ant \"Harpegnathos saltator\", worker policing prevents the number of reproductive workers from becoming excessive. The species has gamergates, which lay eggs but rarely carry out any other tasks, so having too many of them would reduce the colony's efficiency. Gamergate numbers are rather stable, as infertile workers target newly ovipositing workers by jumping on and holding them: this efficiently inhibits them from laying eggs, and within a few weeks they revert to being subordinate and infertile workers. However, once new ovipositing workers attain a gamergate's level of ovarian activity, the infertile (policing) workers ignore them. The signal used by the policing workers consists of cuticle hydrocarbons transmitted only by direct contact, rather than being a pheromone detected by olfaction. Similarly, the inhibition of ovipositing workers is achieved by direct physical aggression by policing workers, not by any pheromone produced by queens or gamergates.\n\nThe tree wasp \"Dolichovespula sylvestris\" also displays worker policing. Both egg-eating and aggression are reported in these wasp communities, and the queen also engages in the policing process. Similar behavior has been observed in the closely related species \"Dolichovespula media\".\n\nIn colonies of the paper wasp, \"Polistes chinensis antennalis\", workers can lay up to a quarter of the male eggs in the colony. The number of eggs that survived to hatching, however, was minimal compared to the number produced by the queen. Analysis of the microsatellite markers showed that both queens and workers contributed to policing of worker and queen-laid eggs even in monogynous and monandrous colonies.\n\nThe common wasp, \"Vespula vulgaris\", engages in worker policing, and it is known that a significant number of workers have active ovaries. However, studies by researchers have suggested that relatedness may not be the key factor in the development of worker policing. Rather, it is hypothesized that worker policing has been selected due to conflict suppression in the colony.\n\nIn a test of worker policing, researchers examined the removal of worker-laid eggs in \"Vespula rufa\", a wasp that has low paternity. Under the testing conditions, worker policing was not as efficient, and some of the drones appeared to be from worker-laid eggs.\n\nThe European Hornet, \"Vespa crabro\", was previously thought to be under reproductive pheromone control by the queen, thus explaining why the other females didn't reproduce, even though they were capable of doing so. Experiments by Foster showed that the workers were instead regulating sterility in each other, thus instead exhibiting worker policing. While each worker is capable of reproducing, the colony as a whole is more efficient and organized if the workers allow only the queen to lay larvae.\n\n\"Synoeca cyanea\" also engage in worker policing during times when queen repopulation is not needed. They will prevent females from laying eggs through aggressive behavior and egg-eating.\n\nVery rarely, female worker bees lay eggs that escape worker policing, in a process known as the anarchic syndrome. Female reproductive workers in these colonies activate their ovaries even in the presence of a queen. The worker eggs are allowed as they mimic queen hydrocarbons. Thus, female workers can maximize their reproductive fitness at the expense of the colony. Anarchic syndrome is an example of selection working in opposite directions at individual and group levels.\n\n\"Temnothorax unifasciatus\", a myrmicinid ant, has been shown not to have collective worker policing. However, when a queen is removed, a rank order for reproduction appears, where top ranking reproductives display aggression towards lower-order female workers. Thus, reductions in egg laying are created by dominance hierarchies. Individuals do not act in benefit of the colony, instead opting to increase their own fitness by laying their eggs and reducing the contributions of opponents.\n\nThis type of policy is common in Dolichovespula norwegica wasps where despite being more related to other workers’ sons, worker-laid eggs were consumed by other workers.\n\nIn the thelytokous ant \"Platythyrea punctata\", colonies are clonal; therefore, workers are all equally related genetically, and worker policing is not expected as there is no genetic conflict. However, one would expect severe effects on the condition of the colony if reproductive workers were left unchecked. For example, more time spent on individual reproduction would be predicted to detract from care of the queen's offspring. In studies of these ants, workers did actually display worker policing, as evidenced by increased aggression towards reproductive workers. Worker policing here is favored for group efficiency.\n\n", "id": "37289928", "title": "Worker policing"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25391738", "text": "Apicomplexan life cycle\n\nApicomplexans, a group of intracellular parasites, have life cycle stages evolved to allow them to survive the wide variety of environments they are exposed to during their complex life cycle. Each stage in the life cycle of an apicomplexan organism is typified by a \"cellular variety\" with a distinct morphology and biochemistry.\n\nNot all apicomplexa develop all the following cellular varieties and division methods. This presentation is intended as an outline of a hypothetical generalised apicomplexan organism.\n\nApicomplexans (sporozoans) replicate via ways of multiple fission (also known as schizogony). These ways include ', ' and , although the latter is sometimes referred to as schizogony, despite its general meaning.\n\nMerogony is an asexually reproductive process of apicomplexa. After infecting a host cell, a trophozoite (see glossary below) increases in size while repeatedly replicating its nucleus and other organelles. During this process, the organism is known as a ' or '. Cytokinesis next subdivides the multinucleated schizont into numerous identical daughter cells called merozoites (see glossary below), which are released into the blood when the host cell ruptures. Organisms whose life cycles rely on this process include \"Theileria\", \"Babesia\", \"Plasmodium\", and \"Toxoplasma gondii.\"\n\nSporogony is a type of sexual and asexual reproduction. It involves karyogamy, the formation of a zygote, which is followed by meiosis and multiple fission. This results in the production of sporozoites.\n\nOther forms of replication include ' and '.\nEndogeny is a process of asexual reproduction, favoured by parasites such as \"Toxoplasma gondii\". It involves an unusual process in which two daughter cells are produced inside a mother cell, which is then consumed by the offspring prior to their separation.\n\nEndopolygeny is the division into several organisms at once by internal budding.\n\nA (G. \"sporos\", seed + \"zōon\", animal) is the cell form that infects new hosts. In \"Plasmodium\", for instance, the sporozoites are cells that develop in the mosquito's salivary glands, leave the mosquito during a blood meal, and enter liver cells (hepatocytes), where they multiply. Cells infected with sporozoites eventually burst, releasing merozoites into the bloodstream. Sporozoites are motile and they move by gliding.\n\nA (G. \"meros\", part [of a series] +\"zōon\", animal) is the result of merogony that takes place within a host cell. In coccidiosis, merozoites form the first phase of the internal life cycle of coccidian. In the case of \"Plasmodium\", merozoites infect red blood cells and then rapidly reproduce asexually. The red blood cell host is destroyed by this process, which releases many new merozoites that go on to find new blood-borne hosts. Merozoites are non-motile. Before schizogony, the merozoite is also known as the schizozoite.\n\nA (G. \"gametēs\", partner + \"kytos\", cell) is a name given to a parasite's gamete-forming cells. A male gametocyte divides to give many flagellated microgametes, whereas the female gametocyte differentiates to a macrogamete.\n\nAn (G. \"ōon\", egg + \"kinētos\", motile) is a fertilised zygote capable of moving spontaneously. It penetrates epithelial cells lining the midgut of mosquitoes to form a thick-walled structure known as an oocyst under the mosquito's outer gut lining. Ookinetes are motile and they move by gliding.\n\nA (G. \"trophē\", nourishment + \"zōon\", animal) is the activated, intracellular feeding stage in the apicomplexan life cycle. After gorging itself on its host, the trophozoite undergoes schizogony and develops into a schizont, later releasing merozoites.\n\nA (G. \"bradys\", slow + \"zōon\", animal) is a sessile, slow-growing form of zoonotic microorganisms such as \"Toxoplasma gondii\", among others responsible for parasitic infections. In chronic (latent) toxoplasmosis, bradyzoites microscopically present as clusters enclosed by an irregular crescent-shaped wall (a pseudocyst) in infected muscle and brain tissues.\n\nA (G. \"tachys\", fast + \"zōon\", animal), contrasting with a bradyzoite, is a form typified by rapid growth and replication. Tachyzoites are the motile forms of those coccidians which form tissue cysts, such as \"Toxoplasma\" and \"Sarcocystis\". Typically infecting cellular vacuoles, tachyzoites divide by endodyogeny and endopolygeny.\n\nAn (G. \"ōon\", egg + \"kystis\", bladder) is a hardy, thick-walled spore, able to survive for lengthy periods outside a host. The zygote develops within the spore, which acts to protect it during transfer to new hosts. Organisms that create oocysts include \"Eimeria\", \"Isospora\", \"Cryptosporidium\", and \"Toxoplasma\".\n\n", "id": "25391738", "title": "Apicomplexan life cycle"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39107086", "text": "Sexual and reproductive health and rights\n\nSexual and reproductive health and rights or \"SRHR\" is the concept of human rights applied to sexuality and reproduction. It is a combination of four fields that in some contexts are more or less distinct from each other, but less so or not at all in other contexts. These four fields are sexual health, sexual rights, reproductive health and reproductive rights. In the concept of SRHR, these four fields are treated as separate but inherently intertwined.\n\nDistinctions between these four fields are not always made. Sexual health and reproductive health are sometimes treated as synonymous to each other, as are sexual rights and reproductive rights. In some cases, sexual rights are included in the term sexual health, or vice versa. Not only do different non-governmental organisations (NGOs) and governments use different terminologies, but different terminologies are often used within the same organization.\n\nSome of the notable global NGOs that fight for sexual and reproductive health and rights include IPPF (International Planned Parenthood Federation), ILGA (International Lesbian and Gay Alliance)), WAS (World Association for Sexual Health - formerly known as World Association for Sexology), and International HIV/AIDS Alliance.\n\nThe World Health Organization defines sexual health as: \"Sexual health is a state of physical, mental and social well-being in relation to sexuality. It requires a positive and respectful approach to sexuality and sexual relationships, as well as the possibility of having pleasurable and safe sexual experiences, free of coercion, discrimination and violence.\"\n\nUnlike the other three aspects of SRHR, the struggle for sexual rights include, and focus on, sexual pleasure and emotional sexual expression. One platform for this struggle is the WAS Declaration of Sexual Rights.\n\nThe Platform for Action from the 1995 Beijing Conference on Women established that human rights include the right of women freely and without coercion, violence or discrimination, to have control over and make decisions concerning their own sexuality, including their own sexual and reproductive health. This paragraph has been interpreted by some countries as the applicable definition of women’s sexual rights. The UN Commission on Human Rights has established that if women had more power, their ability to protect themselves against violence would be strengthened.\n\nAt the 14th World Congress of Sexology (Hong Kong, 1999), the WAS adopted the Declaration of Sexual Rights, which originally included 11 sexual rights. It was heavily revised and expanded in March 2014 by the WAS Advisory Council to include 16 sexual rights:\n\nThis Declaration influenced The Yogyakarta Principles (which were launched as a set of international principles relating to sexual orientation and gender identity on 26 March 2007), especially on the idea of each person's integrity, and right to sexual and reproductive health.\n\nIn 2015 the U.S. government said it would begin using the term \"sexual rights\" in discussions of human rights and global development.\n\nWithin the framework of the World Health Organization's (WHO) definition of health as a state of complete physical, mental and social well-being, and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity, reproductive health, or sexual health/hygiene, addresses the reproductive processes, functions and system at all stages of life. Reproductive health, therefore, implies that people are able to have a responsible, satisfying and safer sex life and that they have the capability to reproduce and the freedom to decide if, when and how often to do so. One interpretation of this implies that men and women ought to be informed of and to have access to safe, effective, affordable and acceptable methods of birth control; also access to appropriate health care services of sexual, reproductive medicine and implementation of health education programs to stress the importance of women to go safely through pregnancy and childbirth could provide couples with the best chance of having a healthy infant. On the other hand, individuals do face inequalities in reproductive health services. Inequalities vary based on socioeconomic status, education level, age, ethnicity, religion, and resources available in their environment. It is possible for example, that low income individuals lack the resources for appropriate health services and the knowledge to know what is appropriate for maintaining reproductive health.\n\nReproductive rights are legal rights and freedoms relating to reproduction and reproductive health. The World Health Organization defines reproductive rights as follows:\n\nReproductive rights rest on the recognition of the basic right of all couples and individuals to decide freely and responsibly the number, spacing and timing of their children and to have the information and means to do so, and the right to attain the highest standard of sexual and reproductive health. They also include the right of all to make decisions concerning reproduction free of discrimination, coercion and violence.\n", "id": "39107086", "title": "Sexual and reproductive health and rights"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1608622", "text": "Isogamy\n\nIsogamy is a form of sexual reproduction that involves gametes of similar morphology (similar shape and size), differing in general only in allele expression in one or more mating-type regions. Because both gametes look alike, they cannot be classified as \"male\" or \"female.\" Instead, organisms undergoing isogamy are said to have different mating types, most commonly noted as \"+\" and \"−\" strains, although in some species of Basidiomycota there are more than two mating types (designated by numbers or letters). In all cases, fertilization occurs when gametes of two different mating types fuse to form a zygote.\n\nIt appears that isogamy was the first stage of sexual reproduction. In several lineages (plants, animals), this form of reproduction independently evolved to anisogamous species with gametes of male and female types to oogamous species in which the female gamete is very much larger than the male and has no ability to move. There is a good argument that this pattern was driven by the physical constraints on the mechanisms by which two gametes get together as required for sexual reproduction.\n\nIn Ascomycetes, anisogamy (sexes) evolved from isogamy before mating types.\n\nThere are several types of isogamy. Both gametes may be flagellated and thus motile. This type occurs for example in algae such as some but not all species of \"Chlamydomonas\".\n\nIn another type, neither of the gametes is flagellated. This is the case for example in the mating of yeast. Yeast mating types are commonly noted as \"a\" and \"α\" (alpha) instead of \"+\" and \"-\".\n\nAnother, more complex form, is conjugation (similar to the exchange of genetic material through a bridge in bacterial conjugation, but involving reproduction). This occurs in some the green algae, the Zygnematophyceae, e.g., \"Spirogyra\". These algae grow as filaments of cells. When two filaments of opposing mating types come close together, the cells form conjugation tubes between the filaments. Once the tubes are formed, one cell balls up and crawls through the tube into the other cell to fuse with it, forming a zygote.\n\nIn ciliates, cell fission may follow self-fertilization (autogamy), or it may follow conjugation (exchange of nuclei).\n\nIn zygomycetes fungi, two hyphae of opposing mating types form special structures called gametangia where the hyphae touch. The gametangia then fuse into a zygosporangium. In other fungi, cells from two hyphae with opposing mating types fuse, but only the cytoplasm is fused (plasmogamy). The two nuclei do not fuse, leading to the formation of a dikaryon cell that gives rise to a mycelium consisting of dikaryons. Karyogamy (fusion of nuclei) then eventually occurs in sporangia, and leads to the formation of diploid cells (zygotes) that immediately undergo meiosis to form spores.\n\nIn many cases, isogamous fertilization is used by organisms that can also reproduce asexually through binary fission, budding, or asexual spore formation. The switch to sexual reproduction mode is often triggered by a change from favorable to unfavorable growing conditions. Fertilization often leads to the formation of a thick-walled zygotic resting spore that can withstand harsh environments and will germinate once growing conditions turn favorable again.\n\n\n", "id": "1608622", "title": "Isogamy"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2734882", "text": "Litter (animal)\n\nA litter is the live birth of multiple offspring at one time in animals from the same mother and usually from one set of parents, particularly from three to eight offspringThe word is most often used for the offspring of mammals, but can be used for any animal that gives birth to multiple young. In comparison, a group of eggs and the offspring that hatch from them are frequently called a clutch, while young birds are often called a brood. Animals from the same litter are referred to as litter-mates.\n\nAnimals frequently display grouping behavior in herds, swarms, flocks, or colonies, and these multiple births derive similar advantages. A litter offers some protection from predation, not particularly to the individual young but to the parents' investment in breeding. With multiple young, predators could eat several and others could still survive to reach maturity, but with only one offspring, its loss could mean a wasted breeding season. The other significant advantage is the chance for the healthiest young animals to be favored from a group. Rather than it being a conscious decision on the part of the parents, the fittest and strongest baby competes most successfully for food and space, leaving the weakest young, or runts, to die through lack of care.\n\nIn the wild, only a small percentage, if any, of the litter may survive to maturity, whereas for domesticated animals and those in captivity with human care the whole litter almost always survives. Kittens and puppies are in this group. Carnivores, rodents, and pigs usually have litters, while primates and larger herbivores usually have singletons.\n", "id": "2734882", "title": "Litter (animal)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40963632", "text": "History of in vitro fertilisation\n\nThe history of in vitro fertilisation goes back more than half a century.\n\nThere was a transient biochemical pregnancy reported by Australian Foxton School researchers in 1953. John Rock was the first to extract an intact fertilized egg. In 1959, Min Chueh Chang at the Worcester Foundation, proved fertilisation in vitro was capable of proceeding to a birth of a live rabbit. Chang's discovery was seminal, as it clearly demonstrated that oocytes fertilised in vitro were capable of developing, if transferred into the uterus and thereby produce live young. The first pregnancy achieved through \"in vitro\" human fertilisation of a human oocyte was reported in The Lancet from the Monash University team of Carl Wood, John Leeton and Alan Trounson in 1973, although it lasted only a few days and would today be called a biochemical pregnancy. Landrum Shettles attempted to perform an IVF in 1973, but his departmental chairman interdicted the procedure at the last moment. There was also an ectopic pregnancy reported by Patrick Steptoe and Robert Edwards in 1976. In 1977, Steptoe and Edwards successfully carried out a pioneering conception which resulted in the birth of the world's first baby to be conceived by IVF, Louise Brown on 25 July 1978, in Oldham General Hospital, Greater Manchester, UK.\n\nIn October 1978, it was reported that Subash Mukhopadyay, a relatively unknown physician from Kolkata, India was performing experiments on his own with primitive instruments and a household refrigerator and this resulted in a test tube baby, later named as \"Durga\" (alias Kanupriya Agarwal) who was born on 3 October 1978. However, state authorities prevented him from presenting his work at scientific conferences and, in the absence of scientific evidence, his work is not recognised by the international scientific community. These days, however, Mukhopadhyay's contribution is acknowledged in works dealing with the subject.\n\nSteptoe and Edwards were responsible for the world’s first confirmed boy conceived by IVF, Alastair MacDonald born on 14 January 1979 in Glasgow. A team led by Ian Johnston and Alex Lopata were responsible for Australia's first baby conceived by IVF, Candice Reed, born on 23 June 1980 in Melbourne. It was the subsequent use of stimulated cycles with clomiphene citrate and the use of human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG) to control and time oocyte maturation, thus controlling the time of collection, that converted IVF from a research tool to a clinical treatment.\n\nThis was followed by a total of 14 pregnancies resulting in nine births in 1981 with the Monash University team. Howard W. Jones and Georgeanna Seegar Jones at the Eastern Virginia Medical School in Norfolk, Virginia, further improved stimulated cycles by incorporating the use of a follicle-stimulating hormone (uHMG). This then became known as controlled ovarian hyperstimulation (COH). Another step forward was the use of gonadotrophin-releasing hormone agonists (GnRHA), thus decreasing the need for monitoring by preventing premature ovulation, and more recently gonadotrophin-releasing hormone antagonists (GnRH Ant), which have a similar function. The additional use of the oral contraceptive pill has allowed the scheduling of IVF cycles, which has made the treatment far more convenient for both staff and patients.\n\nThe ability to freeze and subsequently thaw and transfer embryos has significantly improved the feasibility of IVF use. The other very significant milestone in IVF was the development of the intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) of single sperms by Gianpiero D. Palermo et al.in Brussels (UZ Brussel), 1992. This has enabled men with minimal sperm production to achieve pregnancies. ICSI is sometimes used in conjunction with sperm recovery, using a testicular fine needle or open testicular biopsy. Using this method, some men with Klinefelter's syndrome, and so would be otherwise infertile, have occasionally been able to achieve pregnancy. Thus, IVF has become the final solution for most fertility problems, moving from tubal disease to male factor, idiopathic subfertility, endometriosis, advanced maternal age, and anovulation not responding to ovulation induction.\n\nRobert Edwards was awarded the 2010 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine \"for the development of \"in vitro\" fertilization\". Carl Wood was dubbed \"the father of IVF (\"in vitro\" fertilisation)\" for having pioneered the use of frozen embryos.\n\nIn the US, ART cycles started in 2006 resulted in 41,343 births (54,656 infants), which is slightly more than 1% of total US births.\n", "id": "40963632", "title": "History of in vitro fertilisation"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=41838740", "text": "Micropyle (zoology)\n\nA micropyle is a pore in the membrane covering the ovum, through which a sperm enters.\nMicropyles are also found in sporozoites of some digenetic microorganisms such as \"Plasmodium\" at the anterior part of the cell that ultimately leads towards the apical cap. Another example of an organism with micropyle is Bombyx mandarina. \n", "id": "41838740", "title": "Micropyle (zoology)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42716948", "text": "Final maturation induction\n\nInduction of final maturation of oocytes is a procedure that is usually performed as part of controlled ovarian hyperstimulation to render the oocytes fully developed and thereby resulting in optimal pregnancy chances. It is basically a replacement for the luteinizing hormone (LH) surge whose effects include final maturation in natural menstrual cycles.\n\nThe main medications used for induction of final maturation are human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) and GnRH agonist. In fresh (rather than frozen) autologous cycles of \"in vitro\" fertilization, final oocyte maturation triggering with GnRH agonist instead of hCG decreases the risk of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome but decreases live birth rate. In cycles followed by oocyte donation, use of GnRH agonists instead of hCG decreases the risk of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome with no evidence of a difference in live birth rate.\n\nInduction of final maturation also initiates the mechanisms that eventually result in ovulation, and thereby makes the oocytes destined to undergo ovulation unless artificial oocyte retrieval is performed first. Therefore, induction of final maturation is also called triggering oocyte release from the ovary, and the administration of pharmaceutical drugs to induce final maturation is colloquially called giving a \"trigger shot\", even if the plan is to perform artificial oocyte retrieval before ovulation.\n\nAdministration of a drug to trigger oocyte release without oocyte retrieval results in a predicatable time of ovulation, with the interval from drug administration to ovulation depending on the type of drug. This avails for sexual intercourse or intrauterine insemination (IUI) to conviently be scheduled at ovulation, the most likely time to achieve pregnancy.\n\nIn cycles stimulated with clomifene for intended conception by sexual intercourse, however, triggering oocyte release has been shown to decrease pregnancy chances compared to frequent monitoring with LH surge tests. Therefore, in such cases, triggering oocyte release is best reserved for women who require IUI and in whom LH monitoring proves difficult or unreliable. It may also be used when LH monitoring hasn't shown an LH surge by cycle day 18 (where cycle day 1 is the first day of the preseding menstruation) and there is an ovarian follicle of over 20 mm in size.\n\nIn \"in vitro\" fertilization (IVF), induction of final maturation avails for egg retrieval when the eggs are fully mature.\n\nIn IVF, final maturation induction is preceded by controlled ovarian hyperstimulation. It is suggested that there should be a size of ovarian follicles of at least 15 mm, and serum estradiol level of 0.49 nmol/L before commencing final maturation induction. There are better prospects at a follicle size of 18 mm and serum estradiol level of 0.91 nmol/L.\n\nMedications used for final maturation and/or release of oocytes include:\n\nFinal maturation induction using GnRH agonist results in a substantial decrease in the risk of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS). A Cochrane review estimated that using GnRH agonist instead of hCG in IVF decreases the risk of mild, moderate or severe OHSS with an odds ratio of approximately 0.15. The review estimated that, for a woman with a 5% risk of mild, moderate or severe OHSS with the use of HCG, the risk of OHSS with the use of a GnRH agonist would be between 0 and 2%.\n\nHowever, using GnRH agonist has a lower live birth rate than when using hCG in autologous oocyte transfers (rather than ones using oocyte donation). A Cochrane review of autologous oocyte transfers estimated that GnRH agonist, compared to hCG, gives an odds ratio of pregnancy of approximately 0.47. It estimated that, for a woman with a 31% chance of achieving live birth with the use of hCG, the chance of a live birth with the use of an GnRH agonist would be between 12% and 24%. Likewise, using GnRH agonist instead of hCG was associated with a lower ongoing pregnancy rate (pregnancy beyond 12 weeks) than was seen with HCG (odds ratio 0.70) and a higher rate of early (less than 12 weeks) miscarriage (odds ratio 1.74). However, a higher pregnancy rate when using hCG is only found in those receiving luteal support without luteinizing hormone activity (such as progesterone or progestin).\n\nFinal maturation induction using a GnRH agonist is recommended in women with cancer undergoing fertility preservation, because ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome is associated with an increased risk of arterial thrombotic events such as stroke, myocardial infarction and peripheral arterial embolism, and this risk can add to an already increased risk caused by the cancer.\n\nUsing hCG versus GnRH agonist has no effect on the risk of multiple pregnancy. Also, no difference has been found between the regimens regarding live birth rate or ongoing pregnancy rate when the controlled ovarian hyperstimulation was followed by oocyte donation.\n", "id": "42716948", "title": "Final maturation induction"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18611260", "text": "Hermaphrodite\n\nIn biology, a hermaphrodite is an organism that has reproductive organs and produces gametes normally associated with both male and female sexes. Many taxonomic groups of animals (mostly invertebrates) do not have separate sexes. In these groups, hermaphroditism is a normal condition, enabling a form of sexual reproduction in which either partner can act as the \"female\" or \"male\". For example, the great majority of tunicates, pulmonate snails, opisthobranch snails and slugs are hermaphrodites. Hermaphroditism is also found in some fish species and to a lesser degree in other vertebrates. Most plants are also hermaphrodites.\n\nHistorically, the term \"hermaphrodite\" has also been used to describe ambiguous genitalia and gonadal mosaicism in individuals of gonochoristic species, especially human beings. The word \"intersex\" has come into preferred usage for humans, since the word \"hermaphrodite\" is considered to be misleading and stigmatizing, as well as \"scientifically specious and clinically problematic\".\n\nA rough estimate of the number of hermaphroditic animal species is 65,000. Since the estimated total number of animal species is 8.6 million, the percentage of animal species that are hermaphroditic is about 0.7%. Arthropods are the phylum with the largest number of species. Most hermaphroditic species exhibit some degree of self-fertilization. The distribution of self-fertilization rates among animals is similar to that of plants, suggesting that similar processes are operating to direct the evolution of selfing in animals and plants.\n\nThe term derives from the , from , which derives from Hermaphroditus (Ἑρμαφρόδιτος), the son of Hermes and Aphrodite in Greek mythology. According to Ovid, he fused with the nymph Salmacis resulting in one individual possessing physical traits of male and female sexes; according to the earlier Diodorus Siculus, he was born with a physical body combining male and female sexes. The word \"hermaphrodite\" entered the English lexicon as early as the late fourteenth century. Alexander ab Alexandro stated, using the term \"hermaphrodite,\" that the people who bore the sexes of both man and woman were regarded by the Athenians and the Romans as monsters, and thrown into the sea at Athens and into the Tiber at Rome.\n\nSequential hermaphrodites (dichogamy) occur in species in which the individual is born as one sex, but can later change into the opposite sex. This contrasts simultaneous hermaphrodites, in which an individual may possess fully functional male and female genitalia. Sequential hermaphroditism is common in fish (particularly teleost fish) and some jellyfish, many gastropods (such as the common slipper shell), and some flowering plants. Sequential hermaphrodites can only change sex once. Sequential hermaphroditism can best be understood in terms of behavioral ecology and evolutionary life history theory, as described in the size-advantage mode first proposed by Michael T. Ghiselin which states that if an individual of a certain sex could significantly increase its reproductive success after reaching a certain size, it would be to their advantage to switch to that sex.\n\nSequential hermaphrodites can be divided into three broad categories:\nDichogamy can have both conservation-related implications for humans, as mentioned above, as well as economic implications. For instance, groupers are favoured fish for eating in many Asian countries and are often aquacultured. Since the adults take several years to change from female to male, the broodstock are extremely valuable individuals.\n\nA simultaneous (or synchronous) hermaphrodite (or homogamous) is an adult organism that has both male and female sexual organs at the same time. Self-fertilization often occurs.\n\nWhen spotted hyenas were first discovered by explorers, they were thought to be hermaphrodites. Early observations of spotted hyenas in the wild led researchers to believe that all spotted hyenas, male and female, were born with what appeared to be a penis. The apparent penis in female spotted hyenas is in fact an enlarged clitoris, which contains an external birth canal. It can be difficult to determine the sex of wild spotted hyenas until sexual maturity, when they may become pregnant. When a female spotted hyena gives birth, they pass the cub through the cervix internally, but then pass it out through the elongated clitoris.\n\n\"Hermaphrodite\" is used in older literature to describe any person whose physical characteristics do not neatly fit male or female classifications, but the term has been replaced by intersex. Intersex describes a wide variety of combinations of what are considered male and female biology. Intersex biology may include, for example, ambiguous-looking external genitalia, karyotypes that include mixed XX and XY chromosome pairs (46XX/46XY, 46XX/47XXY or 45X/XY mosaic).\n\nClinically, medicine currently describes intersex people as having disorders of sex development, a term vigorously contested. This is particularly because of a relationship between medical terminology and medical intervention. Intersex civil society organizations, and many human rights institutions, have criticized medical interventions designed to make intersex bodies more typically male or female.\n\nSome people who are intersex, such as some of those with androgen insensitivity syndrome, outwardly appear completely female or male, frequently without realizing they are intersex. Other kinds of intersex conditions are identified immediately at birth because those with the condition have a sexual organ larger than a clitoris and smaller than a penis.\n\nSome humans were historically termed true hermaphrodites if their gonadal tissue contained both testicular and ovarian tissue, or pseudohermaphrodites if their external appearance (phenotype) differed from sex expected from internal gonads. This language has fallen out of favor due to misconceptions and pejorative connotations associated with the terms, and also a shift to nomenclature based on genetics.\n\nIntersex is in some caused by unusual sex hormones; the unusual hormones may be caused by an atypical set of sex chromosomes. One possible pathophysiologic explanation of intersex in humans is a parthenogenetic division of a haploid ovum into two haploid ova. Upon fertilization of the two ova by two sperm cells (one carrying an X and the other carrying a Y chromosome), the two fertilized ova are then fused together resulting in a person having dual genitalial, gonadal (ovotestes) and genetic sex. Another common cause of being intersex is the crossing over of the SRY from the Y chromosome to the X chromosome during meiosis. The SRY is then activated in only certain areas, causing development of testes in some areas by beginning a series of events starting with the upregulation of SOX9, and in other areas not being active (causing the growth of ovarian tissues). Thus, testicular and ovarian tissues will both be present in the same individual.\n\nFetuses before sexual differentiation are sometimes described as female by doctors explaining the process. This is technically not true. Before this stage, humans are simply undifferentiated and possess a Müllerian duct, a Wolffian duct, and a genital tubercle.\n\nHermaphrodite is used in botany to describe a flower that has both staminate (male, pollen-producing) and carpellate (female, ovule-producing) parts. This condition is seen in many common garden plants. A closer analogy to hermaphroditism in botany is the presence of separate male and female flowers on the same individual—such plants are called monoecious. Monoecy is especially common in conifers, but occurs in only about 7% of angiosperm species.\n\n\n\n", "id": "18611260", "title": "Hermaphrodite"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46828", "text": "Fertilisation\n\nFertilisation or fertilization (see spelling differences), also known as generative fertilisation, conception, fecundation, syngamy and impregnation, is the fusion of gametes to initiate the development of a new individual organism. The cycle of fertilisation and development of new individuals is called sexual reproduction. During double fertilisation in angiosperms the haploid male gamete combines with two haploid polar nuclei to form a triploid primary endosperm nucleus by the process of vegetative fertilisation.\n\nIn 1784, Spallanzani established the need of interaction between the female's ovum and male's sperm to form a zygote. Oscar Hertwig (1876), in Germany, described the fusion of nuclei of spermatozoa and of ova from sea urchin.\n\nThe gametes that participate in fertilisation of plants are the sperm (male), and the egg cell, and in flowering plants a second fertilisation event involves another sperm cell and the central cell which is a second female gamete. In flowering plants there are two sperm from each pollen grain.\n\nIn seed plants, after pollination, a pollen grain germinates, and a pollen tube grows and penetrates the ovule through a tiny pore called a micropyle. The sperm are transferred from the pollen through the pollen tube.\n\nBryophyte is a traditional name used to refer to all embryophytes (land plants) that do not have true vascular tissue and are therefore called \"non-vascular plants\". Some bryophytes do have specialised tissues for the transport of water; however, since these do not contain lignin, they are not considered true vascular tissue.\nA fern is a member of a group of roughly 12,000 species of vascular plants that reproduce via spores and have neither seeds nor flowers. They differ from mosses by being vascular (i.e. having water-conducting vessels). They have stems and leaves, like other vascular plants. Most ferns have what are called fiddleheads that expand into fronds, which are each delicately divided.\nThe gymnosperms are a group of seed producing plants that includes conifers, Cycads, Ginkgo, and Gnetales. The term \"gymnosperm\" comes from the Greek composite word γυμνόσπερμος (γυμνός gymnos, \"naked\" and σπέρμα sperma, \"seed\"), meaning \"naked seeds\", after the unenclosed condition of their seeds (called ovules in their unfertilised state). Their naked condition stands in contrast to the seeds and ovules of flowering plants (angiosperms), which are enclosed within an ovary. Gymnosperm seeds develop either on the surface of scales or leaves, often modified to form cones, or at the end of short stalks as in Ginkgo.\n\nThe pollen tube does not directly reach the ovary in a straight line. It travels near the skin of the style and curls to the bottom of the ovary, then near the receptacle, it breaks through the ovule through the micropyle (an opening in the ovule wall) and the pollen tube \"bursts\" into the embryo sac.\n\nAfter being fertilised, the ovary starts to swell and develop into the fruit. With multi-seeded fruits, multiple grains of pollen are necessary for syngamy with each ovule. The growth of the pollen tube is controlled by the vegetative (or tube) cytoplasm. Hydrolytic enzymes are secreted by the pollen tube that digest the female tissue as the tube grows down the stigma and style; the digested tissue is used as a nutrient source for the pollen tube as it grows. During pollen tube growth towards the ovary, the generative nucleus divides to produce two separate sperm nuclei (haploid number of chromosomes) – a growing pollen tube therefore contains three separate nuclei, two sperm and one tube. The sperms are interconnected and dimorphic, the large one, in a number of plants, is also linked to the tube nucleus and the interconnected sperm and the tube nucleus form the \"male germ unit\".\n\nDouble fertilisation is the process in angiosperms (flowering plants) in which two sperm from each pollen tube fertilise two cells in a female gametophyte (sometimes called an embryo sac) that is inside an ovule. After the pollen tube enters the gametophyte, the pollen tube nucleus disintegrates and the two sperm cells are released; one of the two sperm cells \"fertilises\" the egg cell (at the bottom of the gametophyte near the micropyle), forming a diploid (2n) zygote. This is the point when fertilisation actually occurs; pollination and fertilisation are two separate processes. The nucleus of the other sperm cell fuses with two haploid polar nuclei (contained in the central cell) in the centre of the gametophyte. The resulting cell is triploid (3n). This triploid cell divides through mitosis and forms the endosperm, a nutrient-rich tissue, inside the seed.\n\nThe two central-cell maternal nuclei (polar nuclei) that contribute to the endosperm arise by mitosis from the single meiotic product that also gave rise to the egg. Therefore, maternal contribution to the genetic constitution of the triploid endosperm is double that of the embryo.\n\nOne primitive species of flowering plant, \"Nuphar polysepala\", has endosperm that is diploid, resulting from the fusion of a sperm with one, rather than two, maternal nuclei. It is believed that early in the development of angiosperm linages, there was a duplication in this mode of reproduction, producing seven-celled/eight-nucleate female gametophytes, and triploid endosperms with a 2:1 maternal to paternal genome ratio.\n\nIn many plants, the development of the flesh of the fruit is proportional to the percentage of fertilised ovules. For example, with watermelon, about a thousand grains of pollen must be delivered and spread evenly on the three lobes of the stigma to make a normal sized and shaped fruit.\n\nCross-fertilisation and self-fertilisation represent different strategies with differing benefits and costs. An estimated 48.7% of plant species are either dioecious or self-incompatible obligate out-crossers. It is also estimated that about 42% of flowering plants exhibit a mixed mating system in nature.\n\nIn the most common kind of mixed mating system, individual plants produce a single type of flower and fruits may contain self-fertilised, out-crossed or a mixture of progeny types. The transition from cross-fertilisation to self-fertilisation is the most common evolutionary transition in plants, and has occurred repeatedly in many independent lineages. About 10-15% of flowering plants are predominantly self-fertilising.\n\nUnder circumstances where pollinators and/or mates are rare, self-fertilisation offers the advantage of reproductive assurance. Self-fertilisation can therefore result in improved colonisation ability. In some species, self-fertilisation has persisted over many generations. \"Capsella rubella\" is a self-fertilisating species that became self-compatible 50,000 to 100,000 years ago. \"Arabidopsis thaliana\" is a predominantly self-fertilising plant with an out-crossing rate in the wild of less than 0.3%; a study suggested that self-fertilisation evolved roughly a million years ago or more in \"A. thaliana\". In long-established self-fertilising plants, the masking of deleterious mutations and the production of genetic variability is infrequent and thus unlikely to provide a sufficient benefit over many generations to maintain the meiotic apparatus. Consequently, one might expect self-fertilisation to be replaced in nature by an ameiotic asexual form of reproduction that would be less costly. However the actual persistence of meiosis and self-fertilisation as a form of reproduction in long-established self-fertilising plants may be related to the immediate benefit of efficient recombinational repair of DNA damage during formation of germ cells provided by meiosis at each generation.\n\nThe mechanics behind fertilisation has been studied extensively in sea urchins and mice. This research addresses the question of how the sperm and the appropriate egg find each other and the question of how only one sperm gets into the egg and delivers its contents. There are three steps to fertilisation that ensure species-specificity:\n\n\nConsideration as to whether an animal (more specifically a vertebrate) uses internal or external fertilisation is often dependent on the method of birth. Oviparous animals laying eggs with thick calcium shells, such as chickens, or thick leathery shells generally reproduce via internal fertilisation so that the sperm fertilises the egg without having to pass through the thick, protective, tertiary layer of the egg. Ovoviviparous and viviparous animals also use internal fertilisation. It is important to note that although some organisms reproduce via amplexus, they may still use internal fertilisation, as with some salamanders. Advantages to internal fertilisation include: minimal waste of gametes; greater chance of individual egg fertilisation, relatively \"longer\" time period of egg protection, and selective fertilisation; many females have the ability to store sperm for extended periods of time and can fertilise their eggs at their own desire.\n\nOviparous animals producing eggs with thin tertiary membranes or no membranes at all, on the other hand, use external fertilisation methods. Advantages to external fertilisation include: minimal contact and transmission of bodily fluids; decreasing the risk of disease transmission, and greater genetic variation (especially during broadcast spawning external fertilisation methods).\n\nSperm find the eggs via chemotaxis, a type of ligand/receptor interaction. Resact is a 14 amino acid peptide purified from the jelly coat of \"A. punctulata\" that attracts the migration of sperm.\n\nAfter finding the egg, the sperm penetrates the jelly coat through a process called sperm activation. In another ligand/receptor interaction, an oligosaccharide component of the egg binds and activates a receptor on the sperm and causes the acrosomal reaction. The acrosomal vesicles of the sperm fuse with the plasma membrane and are released. In this process, molecules bound to the acrosomal vesicle membrane, such as bindin, are exposed on the surface of the sperm. These contents digest the jelly coat and eventually the vitelline membrane. In addition to the release of acrosomal vesicles, there is explosive polymerisation of actin to form a thin spike at the head of the sperm called the acrosomal process.\n\nThe sperm binds to the egg through another ligand reaction between receptors on the vitelline membrane. The sperm surface protein bindin, binds to a receptor on the vitelline membrane identified as EBR1.\n\nFusion of the plasma membranes of the sperm and egg are likely mediated by bindin. At the site of contact, fusion causes the formation of a fertilisation cone.\n\nMammals internally fertilise through copulation. After a male ejaculates, many sperm move to the upper vagina (via contractions from the vagina) through the cervix and across the length of the uterus to meet the ovum. In cases where fertilisation occurs, the female usually ovulates during a period that extends from hours before copulation to a few days after; therefore, in most mammals it is more common for ejaculation to precede ovulation than vice versa.\n\nThe capacitated spermatozoon and the oocyte meet and interact in the \"ampulla\" of the fallopian tube. Rheotaxis, thermotaixs and chemotaxis are known mechanisms in guiding sperm towards the egg during the final stage of sperm migration. Spermatozoa respond (see Sperm thermotaxis) to the temperature gradient of ~2 °C between the oviduct and the ampulla, and chemotactic gradients of progesterone have been confirmed as the signal emanating from the cumulus oophorus cells surrounding rabbit and human oocytes. Capacitated and hyperactivated sperm respond to these gradients by changing their behaviour and moving towards the cumulus-oocyte complex. Other chemotactic signals such as formyl Met-Leu-Phe (fMLF) may also guide spermatozoa.\n\nThe zona pellucida, a thick layer of extracellular matrix that surrounds the egg and is similar to the role of the vitelline membrane in sea urchins, binds with the sperm. Unlike sea urchins, the sperm binds to the egg before the acrosomal reaction. ZP3, a glycoprotein in the zona pellucida, is responsible for egg/sperm adhesion in mice. The receptor galactosyltransferase (GalT) binds to the N-acetylglucosamine residues on the ZP3 and is important for binding with the sperm and activating the acrosome reaction. ZP3 is sufficient though unnecessary for sperm/egg binding. Two additional sperm receptors exist: a 250kD protein that binds to an oviduct secreted protein, and SED1, which independently binds to the zona. After the acrosome reaction, the sperm is believed to remain bound to the zona pellucida through exposed ZP2 receptors. These receptors are unknown in mice but have been identified in guinea pigs.\n\nIn mammals, the binding of the spermatozoon to the GalT initiates the acrosome reaction. This process releases the hyaluronidase that digests the matrix of hyaluronic acid in the vestments around the oocyte. Fusion between the oocyte plasma membranes and sperm follows and allows the sperm nucleus, centriole and flagellum, but not the mitochondria, to enter the oocyte. The protein CD9 likely mediates this fusion in mice (the binding homolog). The egg \"activates\" itself upon fusing with a single sperm cell and thereby changes its cell membrane to prevent fusion with other sperm. Zinc atoms are released during this activation.\n\nThis process ultimately leads to the formation of a diploid cell called a zygote. The zygote divides to form a blastocyst and, upon entering the uterus, implants in the endometrium, beginning pregnancy. Embryonic implantation not in the uterine wall results in an ectopic pregnancy that can kill the mother.\n\nIn such animals as rabbits, coitus induces ovulation by stimulating the release of the pituitary hormone gonadotropin; this release greatly increases the likelihood of pregnancy.\n\nThe term \"conception\" commonly refers to fertilisation, which is the successful fusion of gametes to form a new organism. Its use 'conception' by some to refer to implantation makes it a subject of semantic arguments about the beginning of pregnancy, typically in the context of the abortion debate.\n\nUpon gastrulation, which occurs around 16 days after fertilisation, the implanted blastocyst develops three germ layers, the endoderm, the ectoderm and the mesoderm, and the genetic code of the father becomes fully involved in the development of the embryo; later twinning is impossible. Additionally, interspecies hybrids survive only until gastrulation and cannot further develop.\nHowever, some human developmental biology literature refers to the \"conceptus\" and such medical literature refers to the \"products of conception\" as the post-implantation embryo and its surrounding membranes. The term \"conception\" is not usually used in scientific literature because of its variable definition and connotation.\n\nInsects in different groups, including the Odonata (dragonflies and damselflies) and the Hymenoptera (ants, bees, and wasps) practise delayed fertilisation. Anong the Odonata, females may mate with multiple males, and store sperm until the eggs are laid. The male may hover above the female during egg-laying (oviposition) to prevent her from mating with other males and replacing his sperm; in some groups such as the darters, the male continues to grasp the female with his claspers during egg-laying, the pair flying around in tandem. Among social Hymenoptera, honeybee queens mate only on mating flights, in a short period lasting some days; a queen may mate with eight or more drones. She then stores the sperm for the rest of her life, perhaps for five years or more.\n\nIn many fungi (except chytrids), as in some protists, fertilisation is a two step process. First, the cytoplasms of the two gamete cells fuse (called plasmogamy), producing a dikaryotic or heterokaryotic cell with multiple nuclei. This cell may then divide to produce dikaryotic or heterokaryotic hyphae. The second step of fertilisation is karyogamy, the fusion of the nuclei to form a diploid zygote.\n\nIn chytrid fungi, fertilisation occurs in a single step with the fusion of gametes, as in animals and plants.\n\nThere are three types of fertilisation processes in protozoa:\n\nMeiosis results in a random segregation of the genes that each parent contributes. Each parent organism is usually identical save for a fraction of their genes; each gamete is therefore genetically unique. At fertilisation, parental chromosomes combine. In humans, (2²²)² = 17.6x10 chromosomally different zygotes are possible for the non-sex chromosomes, even assuming no chromosomal crossover. If crossover occurs once, then on average (4²²)² = 309x10 genetically different zygotes are possible for every couple, not considering that crossover events can take place at most points along each chromosome. The X and Y chromosomes undergo no crossover events and are therefore excluded from the calculation. The mitochondrial DNA is only inherited from the maternal parent.\n\nOrganisms that normally reproduce sexually can also reproduce via parthenogenesis, wherein an unfertilised female gamete produces viable offspring. These offspring may be clones of the mother, or in some cases genetically differ from her but inherit only part of her DNA. Parthenogenesis occurs in many plants and animals and may be induced in others through a chemical or electrical stimulus to the egg cell. In 2004, Japanese researchers led by Tomohiro Kono succeeded after 457 attempts to merge the ova of two mice by blocking certain proteins that would normally prevent the possibility; the resulting embryo normally developed into a mouse.\n\nAllogamy, which is also known as cross-fertilisation, refers to the fertilisation of an egg cell from one individual with the male gamete of another.\n\nAutogamy which is also known as self-fertilisation, occurs in such hermaphroditic organisms as plants and flatworms; therein, two gametes from one individual fuse.\n\nSome relatively unusual forms of reproduction are:\n\nGynogenesis: A sperm stimulates the egg to develop without fertilisation or syngamy. The sperm may enter the egg.\n\nHybridogenesis: One genome is eliminated to produce haploid eggs.\n\nCanina meiosis: (sometimes called \"permanent odd polyploidy\") one genome is transmitted in the Mendelian fashion, others are transmitted clonally.\n\nThe major benefit of cross-fertilisation is generally thought to be the avoidance of inbreeding depression. Charles Darwin, in his 1876 book \"The Effects of Cross and Self Fertilisation in the Vegetable Kingdom\" (pages 466-467) summed up his findings in the following way.\n“It has been shown in the present volume that the offspring from the union of two distinct individuals, especially if their progenitors have been subjected to very different conditions, have an immense advantage in height, weight, constitutional vigour and fertility over the self-fertilised offspring from one of the same parents. And this fact is amply sufficient to account for the development of the sexual elements, that is, for the genesis of the two sexes.”\n\nIn addition, it is thought by some, that a long-term advantage of out-crossing in nature is increased genetic variability that promotes adaptation and/or avoidance of extinction (see Genetic variability).\n\n\n", "id": "46828", "title": "Fertilisation"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=155192", "text": "Chimera (genetics)\n\nA genetic chimerism or chimera (also spelled chimaera) is a single organism composed of cells with distinct genotypes. In animals, this means an individual derived from different zygotes, which can include possessing both female and male sex organs, blood cells of two blood types, or subtle variations in form. Animal chimeras are produced by the merger of multiple fertilized eggs. In plant chimeras, however, the distinct types of tissue may originate from the same zygote, and the difference is often due to mutation during ordinary cell division. Normally, genetic chimerism is not visible on casual inspection; however, it has been detected in the course of proving parentage.\n\nAnother way that chimerism can occur in animals is by organ transplantation, giving one individual tissues that developed from a different genome. For example, transplantation of bone marrow (an organ often not thought of as being such) often determines the recipient's ensuing blood type.\n\nAn animal chimera is a single organism that is composed of two or more different populations of genetically distinct cells that originated from different zygotes involved in sexual reproduction. If the different cells have emerged from the same zygote, the organism is called a mosaic. Chimeras are formed from at least four parent cells (two fertilised eggs or early embryos fused together). Each population of cells keeps its own character and the resulting organism is a mixture of tissues. Cases of human chimerism have been documented.\n\nThis condition is either inherited or it is acquired through the infusion of allogeneic hematopoietic cells during transplantation or transfusion. In nonidentical twins, chimerism occurs by means of blood-vessel anastomoses. The likelihood of offspring being a chimera is increased if it is created via in vitro fertilisation. Chimeras can often breed, but the fertility and type of offspring depends on which cell line gave rise to the ovaries or testes; varying degrees of intersex differences may result if one set of cells is genetically female and another genetically male.\n\nTetragametic chimerism is a form of congenital chimerism. This condition occurs through the fertilisation of two separate ova by two sperm, followed by aggregation of the two at the blastocyst or zygote stages. This results in the development of an organism with intermingled cell lines. Put another way, the chimera is formed from the merging of two nonidentical twins (a similar merging presumably occurs with identical twins, but as their genotypes are not significantly distinct, the resulting individual would not be considered a chimera). As such, they can be male, female, or have mixed intersex characteristics.\n\nAs the organism develops, it can come to possess organs that have different sets of chromosomes. For example, the chimera may have a liver composed of cells with one set of chromosomes and have a kidney composed of cells with a second set of chromosomes. This has occurred in humans, and at one time was thought to be extremely rare, though more recent evidence suggests that it is not the case.\n\nThis is particularly true for the marmoset. Recent research shows most marmosets are chimeras, sharing DNA with their fraternal twins. 95% of marmoset fraternal twins trade blood through chorionic fusions, making them hematopoietic chimeras.\n\nMost chimeras will go through life without realizing they are chimeras. The difference in phenotypes may be subtle (\"e.g.\", having a hitchhiker's thumb and a straight thumb, eyes of slightly different colors, differential hair growth on opposite sides of the body, etc.) or completely undetectable. Chimeras may also show, under a certain spectrum of UV light, distinctive marks on the back resembling that of arrow points pointing downwards from the shoulders down to the lower back; this is one expression of pigment unevenness called Blaschko's lines.\n\nAffected persons may be identified by the finding of two populations of red cells or, if the zygotes are of opposite sex, ambiguous genitalia and intersex alone or in combination; such persons sometimes also have patchy skin, hair, or eye pigmentation (heterochromia). If the blastocysts are of opposite sex, genitals of both sexes may be formed: either ovary and testis, or combined ovotestes, in one rare form of intersex, a condition previously known as \"true hermaphroditism\".\n\nNote that the frequency of this condition does \"not\" indicate the true prevalence of chimerism. Most chimeras composed of both male and female cells probably do not have an intersex condition, as might be expected if the two cell populations were evenly blended throughout the body. Often, most or all of the cells of a single cell type will be composed of a single cell line, i.e. the blood may be composed predominantly of one cell line, and the internal organs of the other cell line. Genitalia produce the hormones responsible for other sex characteristics. If the sex organs are homogeneous, the individual will not be expected to exhibit any intersex traits.\n\nNatural chimeras are almost never detected unless they exhibit abnormalities such as male/female or hermaphrodite characteristics or uneven skin pigmentation. The most noticeable are some male tortoiseshell cats (although most male tortoiseshells have an extra X chromosome responsible for the colouration) or animals with ambiguous sex organs.\n\nThe existence of chimerism is problematic for DNA testing, a fact with implications for family and criminal law. The Lydia Fairchild case, for example, was brought to court after DNA testing apparently showed that her children could not be hers. Fraud charges were filed against her and her custody of her children was challenged. The charge against her was dismissed when it became clear that Lydia was a chimera, with the matching DNA being found in her cervical tissue. Another case was that of Karen Keegan, who was also suspected (initially) of not being her children's biological mother, after DNA tests on her adult sons for a kidney transplant she needed seemed to show she wasn't their mother.\n\nThe tetragametic state has important implications for organ or stem-cell transplantation. Chimeras typically have immunologic tolerance to both cell lines.\n\nMicrochimerism is the presence of a small number of cells that are genetically distinct from those of the host individual. Most people are born with a few cells genetically identical to their mothers' and the proportion of these cells goes down in healthy individuals as they get older. People who retain higher numbers of cells genetically identical to their mothers' have been observed to have higher rates of some autoimmune diseases, presumably because the immune system is responsible for destroying these cells and a common immune defect prevents it from doing so and also causes autoimmune problems.\nThe higher rates of autoimmune diseases due to the presence of maternally-derived cells is why in a 2010 study of a 40-year-old man with scleroderma-like disease (an autoimmune rheumatic disease), the female cells detected in his blood stream via FISH (fluorescence in situ hybridization) were thought to be maternally-derived. However, his form of microchimerism was found to be due to a vanished twin, and whether or not microchimerism from a vanished twin might predispose individuals to autoimmune diseases as well is unknown. Women often also have a few cells genetically identical to that of their children, and some people also have some cells genetically identical to that of their siblings (maternal siblings only, since these cells are passed to them because their mother retained them).\n\nChimerism occurs naturally in adult Ceratioid anglerfish and is in fact a natural and essential part of their life cycle. Once the male achieves adulthood, it begins its search for a female. Using strong olfactory (or smell) receptors, the male searches until it locates a female anglerfish. The male, less than an inch in length, bites into her skin and releases an enzyme that digests the skin of both his mouth and her body, fusing the pair down to the blood-vessel level. While this attachment has become necessary for the male's survival, it will eventually consume him, as both anglerfish fuse into a single hermaphroditic individual. Sometimes in this process more than one male will attach to a single female as a symbiote. They will all be consumed into the body of the larger female angler. Once fused to a female, the males will reach sexual maturity, developing large testicles as their other organs atrophy. This process allows for sperm to be in constant supply when the female produces an egg, so that the chimeric fish is able to have a greater number of offspring.\n\nGermline chimerism occurs when the germ cells (for example, sperm and egg cells) of an organism are not genetically identical to its own. It has recently been discovered that marmosets can carry the reproductive cells of their (fraternal) twin siblings, because of placental fusion during development. (Marmosets almost always give birth to fraternal twins.)\n\n\nIn biological research, chimeras are artificially produced by selectively transplanting embryonic cells from one organism onto the embryo of another, and allowing the resultant blastocyst to develop. Chimeras are not hybrids, which form from the fusion of gametes from two species that form a single zygote with a combined genetic makeup. Nor are they Hybridomas which, as with hybrids, result from fusion of two species' cells into a single cell and artificial propagation of this cell in the laboratory. Essentially, in a chimera, each cell is from either of the parent species, whereas in a hybrid and hybridoma, each cell is derived from both parent species. \"Chimera\" is a broad term and is often applied to many different mechanisms of the mixing of cells from two different species.\n\nAs with cloning, the process of creating and implanting a chimera is imprecise, with the majority of embryos spontaneously terminating. Successes, however, have led to major advancements in the field of embryology, as creating chimeras of one species with different physical traits, such as colour, has allowed researchers to trace the differentiation of embryonic cells through the formation of organ systems in the adult individual.\n\nThe first known primate chimeras are the rhesus monkey twins, Roku and Hex, with each having six genomes. They were created by mixing cells from totipotent four cell blastocysts; although the cells never fused they worked together to form organs. It was discovered that one of these primates, Roku, was a sexual chimera; as four percent of Roku's blood cells contained two x chromosomes.\n\nA major milestone in chimera experimentation occurred in 1984, when a chimeric geep was produced by combining embryos from a goat and a sheep, and survived to adulthood. The creation of the \"geep\" revealed several complexities to chimera development. In implanting a goat embryo for gestation in a sheep, the sheep's immune system would reject the developing goat embryo, whereas a \"geep\" embryo (sharing markers of immunity with both sheep and goats) was able to survive implantation in either of its parent species.\n\nIn August 2003, researchers at the Shanghai Second Medical University in China reported that they had successfully fused human skin cells and rabbit ova to create the first human chimeric embryos. The embryos were allowed to develop for several days in a laboratory setting, then destroyed to harvest the resulting stem cells. In 2007, scientists at the University of Nevada School of Medicine created a sheep whose blood contained 15% human cells and 85% sheep cells.\n\nChimeric mice are important animals in biological research, as they allow the investigation of a variety of biological questions in an animal that has two distinct genetic pools within it. These include insights into such problems as the tissue specific requirements of a gene, cell lineage, and cell potential.\nThe general methods for creating chimeric mice can be summarized either by injection or aggregation of embryonic cells from different origins. The first chimeric mouse was made by Beatrice Mintz in the 1960s through the aggregation of eight-cell-stage embryos. Injection on the other hand was pioneered by Richard Gardner and Ralph Brinster who injected cells into blastocysts to create chimeric mice with germ lines fully derived from injected embryonic stem cells (ES cells). Chimeras can be derived from mouse embryos that have not yet implanted in the uterus as well as from implanted embryos. ES cells from the inner cell mass of an implanted blastocyst can contribute to all cell lineages of a mouse including the germ line. ES cells are a useful tool in chimeras because genes can be mutated in them through the use of homologous recombination, thus allowing gene targeting. Since this discovery occurred in 1999, ES cells have become a key tool in the generation of specific chimeric mice.\n\nThe ability to make mouse chimeras comes from an understanding of early mouse development. Between the stages of fertilization of the egg and the implantation of a blastocyst into the uterus, different parts of the mouse embryo retain the ability to give rise to a variety of cell lineages. Once the embryo has reached the blastocyst stage, it is composed of several parts, mainly the trophectoderm, the inner cell mass, and the primitive endoderm. Each of these parts of the blastocyst gives rise to different parts of the embryo; the inner cell mass gives rise to the embryo proper, while the trophectoderm and primitive endoderm give rise to extra embryonic structures that support growth of the embryo. Two- to eight-cell-stage embryos are competent for making chimeras, since at these stages of development, the cells in the embryos are not yet committed to give rise to any particular cell lineage, and could give rise to the inner cell mass or the trophectoderm. In the case where two diploid eight-cell-stage embryos are used to make a chimera, chimerism can be later found in the epiblast, primitive, endoderm and trophectoderm of the mouse blastocyst.\n\nIt is possible to dissect the embryo at other stages so as to accordingly give rise to one lineage of cells from an embryo selectively and not the other. For example, subsets of blastomeres can be used to give rise to chimera with specified cell lineage from one embryo. The Inner Cell Mass of a diploid blastocyst for example can be used to make a chimera with another blastocyst of eight-cell diploid embryo; the cells taken from the inner cell mass will give rise to the primitive endoderm and to the epiblast in the chimera mouse.\nFrom this knowledge, ES cell contributions to chimeras have been developed. ES cells can be used in combination with eight-cell-and two-cell-stage embryos to make chimeras and exclusively give rise to the embryo proper. Embryos that are to be used in chimeras can further be genetically altered in order to specifically contribute to only one part of chimera. An example is the chimera built off of ES cells and tetraploid embryos, tetraploid embryos which are artificially made by electrofusion of two two-cell diploid embryos. The tetraploid embryo will exclusively give rise to the trophectoderm and primitive endoderm in the chimera.\n\nThere are a variety of combinations that can give rise to a successful chimera mouse and — according to the goal of the experiment — an appropriate cell and embryo combination can be picked; they are generally but not limited to diploid embryo and ES cells, diploid embryo and diploid embryo, ES cell and tetraploid embryo, diploid embryo and tetraploid embryo, ES cells and ES cells. The combination of embryonic stem cell and diploid embryo is a common technique used for the making of chimeric mice, since gene targeting can be done in the embryonic stem cell. These kinds of chimeras can be made through either aggregation of stem cells and the diploid embryo or injection of the stem cells into the diploid embryo. If embryonic stem cells are to be used for gene targeting to make a chimera, the following procedure is common: a construct for homologous recombination for the gene targeted will be introduced into cultured mouse embryonic stem cells from the donor mouse, by way of electroporation; cells positive for the recombination event will have antibiotic resistance, provided by the insertion cassette used in the gene targeting; and be able to be positively selected for. ES cells with the correct targeted gene are then injected into a diploid host mouse blastocyst. These injected blastocysts are then implanted into a pseudo pregnant female surrogate mouse which will bring the embryos to term and give birth to a mouse whose germline is derived from the donor mouse's ES cells. This same procedure can be achieved through aggregation of ES cells and diploid embryos, diploid embryos are cultured in aggregation plates in wells where single embryos can fit, to these wells ES cells are added the aggregates are cultured until a single embryo is formed and has progressed to the blastocyst stage, and can then be transferred to the surrogate mouse.\n\nThe distinction between sectorial, mericlinal and periclinal plant chimeras are widely used.\n\nThese are produced by grafting genetically different parents, different cultivars or different species (which may belong to different genera). The tissues may be partially fused together following grafting to form a single growing organism that preserves both types of tissue in a single shoot. Just as the constituent species are likely to differ in a wide range of features, so the behavior of their periclinal chimeras is like to be highly variable.\nThe first such known chimera was probably the Bizzaria, which is a fusion of the Florentine citron and the sour orange. Well-known examples of a graft-chimera are \"Laburnocytisus\" 'Adamii', caused by a fusion of a \"Laburnum\" and a broom, and \"Family\" trees, where multiple varieties of apple or pear are grafted onto the same tree. Many fruit trees are cultivated by grafting the body of a sapling onto a rootstock.\n\nThese are chimeras in which the layers differ in their chromosome constitution. Occasionally chimeras arise from loss or gain of individual chromosomes or chromosome fragments owing to misdivision. More commonly cytochimeras have simple multiple of the normal chromosome complement in the changed layer. There are various effects on cell size and growth characteristics.\n\nThese chimeras arise by spontaneous or induced mutation of a nuclear gene to a dominant or recessive allele. As a rule one character is affected at a time in the leaf, flower, fruit, or other parts.\n\nThese chimeras arise by spontaneous or induced mutation of a plastid gene, followed by the sorting-out of two kinds of plastid during vegetative growth. Alternatively, after selfing or nucleic acid thermodynamics, plastids may sort-out from a mixed egg or mixed zygote respectively. This type of chimera is recognized at the time of origin by the sorting-out pattern in the leaves. After sorting-out is complete, periclinal chimeras are distinguished from similar looking nuclear gene-differential chimeras by their non-mendelian inheritance. The majority of variegated-leaf chimeras are of this kind.\n\nAll plastid gene- and some nuclear gene-differential chimeras affect the color of the plasmids within the leaves, and these are grouped together as chlorophyll chimeras, or preferably as variegated leaf chimeras. For most variegation, the mutation involved is the loss of the chloroplasts in the mutated tissue, so that part of the plant tissue has no green pigment and no photosynthetic ability. This mutated tissue is unable to survive on its own but is kept alive by its partnership with normal photosynthetic tissue. Sometimes chimeras are also found with layers differing in respect of both their nuclear and their plastid genes.\n\nThere are multiple reasons to explain the occurrence of plant chimera during plant recovery stage:\n\n(1) The process of shoot organogenesis starts form the multicellular origin.\n\n(2) The endogenous tolerance leads to the ineffectiveness of the weak selective agents.\n\n(3) A self-protection mechanism (cross protection). Transformed cells serve as guards to protect the untransformed ones.\n\n(4) The observable characteristic of transgenic cells may be a transient expression of the marker gene. Or it may due to the presence of agrobacterium cells.\n\nUntransformed cells should be easy to detect and remove to avoid chimeras. Because it’s extremely important to maintain the stable ability of the transgenic plants across different generations. Reporter genes such as GUS and Green Fluorescent Protein(GFP) are utilized in combination with plant selective markers (herbicide, antibody etc.) However, GUS expression depends on the plant development stage and GFP may be influenced by the green tissue autofluorescence. Quantitative PCR could be an alternative method for chimera detection.\n\nThe US and Western Europe have strict codes of ethics and regulations in place that expressly forbid certain subsets of experimentation using human cells, though there is a vast difference in the regulatory framework. Through the creation of human-chimera comes the question: where does society now draw the line of humanity? This question poses serious legal and moral issues, along with creating controversy. Chimpanzees, for example, are not offered any legal standing, and are put down if they pose a threat to humans. If a chimpanzee is genetically altered to be more similar to a human, it may blur the ethical line between animal and man. Legal debate would be the next step in the process to determine whether certain chimera should be granted legal rights. Along with issues regarding the rights of chimera, individuals have expressed concern whether or not creating human-chimera diminishes the dignity of being human.\n\nIn May 2008, a robust debate in the House of Commons of the United Kingdom on the ethics of creating chimeras with human stem cells led to the decision that embryos would be allowed to be made in laboratories, given that they would be destroyed within the first 14 days.\n\nOn 11 July 2005 a bill, The Human Chimera Prohibition Act, was introduced into the United States Congress by Senator \nSamuel Brownback, however it died in Congress sometime in the next year. The bill was introduced based on the findings that science has progressed to the point where the human and nonhuman species can be merged to create new forms of life. Because of this serious ethical issues arise as this blurs the line between humans and other animals, and according to the bill with this blurring of the lines comes a show of disrespect for human dignity. The final claim brought up in The Human Chimera Prohibition Act was that there is an increasing amount of zoonotic diseases and the creation of human-animal chimeras can allow these diseases to reach humans. Since the bill's death in congress there has not been another attempt at setting regulations on chimera research in the United States.\n\n\n\n", "id": "155192", "title": "Chimera (genetics)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51472", "text": "Spore\n\nIn biology, a spore is a unit of sexual or asexual reproduction that may be adapted for dispersal and for survival, often for extended periods of time, in unfavourable conditions. Spores form part of the life cycles of many plants, algae, fungi and protozoa. Bacterial spores are not part of a sexual cycle but are resistant structures used for survival under unfavourable conditions. Myxozoan spores release amoebulae into their hosts for parasitic infection, but also reproduce within the hosts through the pairing of two nuclei within the plasmodium, which develops from the amoebula.\n\nSpores are usually haploid and unicellular and are produced by meiosis in the sporangium of a diploid sporophyte. Under favourable conditions the spore can develop into a new organism using mitotic division, producing a multicellular gametophyte, which eventually goes on to produce gametes. Two gametes fuse to form a zygote which develops into a new sporophyte. This cycle is known as alternation of generations.\n\nThe spores of seed plants, however, are produced internally and the megaspores, formed within the ovules and the microspores are involved in the formation of more complex structures that form the dispersal units, the seeds and pollen grains.\n\nThe term \"spore\" derives from the ancient Greek word σπορά \"spora\", meaning \"seed, sowing\", related to σπόρος \"sporos\", \"sowing,\" and σπείρειν \"speirein\", \"to sow.\"\n\nIn common parlance, the difference between a \"spore\" and a \"gamete\" (both together called gonites) is that a spore will germinate and develop into a sporeling, while a gamete needs to combine with another gamete to form a zygote before developing further.\n\nThe main difference between spores and seeds as dispersal units is that spores are unicellular, while seeds contain within them a multicellular gametophyte that produces a developing embryo, the multicellular sporophyte of the next generation. Spores germinate to give rise to haploid gametophytes, while seeds germinate to give rise to diploid sporophytes.\n\nVascular plant spores are always haploid. Vascular plants are either homosporous (or isosporous) or heterosporous. Plants that are homosporous produce spores of the same size and type. \n\nHeterosporous plants, such as seed plants, spikemosses, quillworts, and ferns of the order Salviniales produce spores of two different sizes: the larger spore (megaspore) in effect functioning as a \"female\" spore and the smaller (microspore) functioning as a \"male\". Such plants typically give rise each kind of spores from within a separate sporangium, either a megasporangium that produces megaspores or a microsporangium that produces microspores. In flowering plants, these sporangia occur within the carpel and anthers, respectively.\n\nSpores can be classified in several ways:\n\nIn fungi and fungus-like organisms, spores are often classified by the structure in which meiosis and spore production occurs. Since fungi are often classified according to their spore-producing structures, these spores are often characteristic of a particular taxon of the fungi.\n\n\n\nSpores can be differentiated by whether they can move or not.\n\nUnder high magnification, spores can be categorized as either monolete spores or trilete spores. In monolete spores, there is a single line on the spore indicating the axis on which the mother spore was split into four along a vertical axis. In trilete spores, all four spores share a common origin and are in contact with each other, so when they separate, each spore shows three lines radiating from a center pole.\n\nEnvelope-enclosed spore tetrads are taken as the earliest evidence of plant life on land, dating from the mid-Ordovician (early Llanvirn, ~), a period from which no macrofossils have yet been recovered.\nIndividual trilete spores resembling those of modern cryptogamic plants first appeared in the fossil record at the end of the Ordovician period.\n\nIn fungi, both asexual and sexual spores or sporangiospores of many fungal species are actively dispersed by forcible ejection from their reproductive structures. This ejection ensures exit of the spores from the reproductive structures as well as travelling through the air over long distances. Many fungi thereby possess specialized mechanical and physiological mechanisms as well as spore-surface structures, such as hydrophobins, for spore ejection. These mechanisms include, for example, forcible discharge of ascospores enabled by the structure of the ascus and accumulation of osmolytes in the fluids of the ascus that lead to explosive discharge of the ascospores into the air.\n\nThe forcible discharge of single spores termed \"ballistospores\" involves formation of a small drop of water (Buller's drop), which upon contact with the spore leads to its projectile release with an initial acceleration of more than 10,000 g. Other fungi rely on alternative mechanisms for spore release, such as external mechanical forces, exemplified by puffballs. Attracting insects, such as flies, to fruiting structures, by virtue of their having lively colours and a putrid odour, for dispersal of fungal spores is yet another strategy, most prominently used by the stinkhorns.\n\nIn Common Smoothcap moss (\"Atrichum undulatum\"), the vibration of sporophyte has been shown to be an important mechanism for spore release.\n\nIn the case of spore-shedding vascular plants such as ferns, wind distribution of very light spores provides great capacity for dispersal. Also, spores are less subject to animal predation than seeds because they contain almost no food reserve; however they are more subject to fungal and bacterial predation. Their chief advantage is that, of all forms of progeny, spores require the least energy and materials to produce.\n\nIn the spikemoss \"Selaginella lepidophylla\", dispersal is achieved in part by an unusual type of diaspore, a tumbleweed.\n\n", "id": "51472", "title": "Spore"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1656730", "text": "Sequential hermaphroditism\n\nSequential hermaphroditism (called dichogamy in botany) is a type of hermaphroditism that occurs in many fish, gastropods, and plants. Sequential hermaphroditism occurs when the individual changes sex at some point in its life. It can change from a male to female (protandry), or from female to male (protogyny) or from female to hermaphrodite (protogynous hermaphroditism), or from male to hermaphrodite (protandrous hermaphroditism). Those that change gonadal sex can have both female and male germ cells in the gonads or can change from one complete gonadal type to the other during their last life stage. Individual flowers are also called sequentially hermaphrodite, although the plant as a whole may have functionally male and functionally female flowers open at the same time.\n\nProtandrous hermaphrodites refer to organisms that are born male and at some point in their lifespan change sex to female. Protandrous animals include clownfish. Clownfish have a very structured society. In the \"Amphiprion percula\" species, there are zero to four individuals excluded from breeding and a breeding pair living in a sea anemone. Dominance is based on size, the female being the largest and the male being the second largest. The rest of the group is made up of progressively smaller non-breeders, which have no functioning gonads. If the female dies, the male gains weight and becomes the female for that group. The largest non-breeding fish then sexually matures and becomes the male of the group.\n\nOther protandrous fishes can be found in the classes clupeiformes, siluriformes, stomiiformes, and within the perciform families pomacentridae and sparidae. Since these groups are distantly related and have many intermediate relatives that are not protandrous, it strongly suggests that protandry evolved multiple times. Other examples of protandrous animals include:\n\nProtogynous hermaphrodites refer to organisms that are born female and at some point in their lifespan change sex to male. As the animal ages, based on internal or external triggers, it shifts sex to become a male animal. Male fecundity increases greatly with age, unlike female.\n\nProtogyny is the most common form of hermaphroditism in fish in nature. About 75% of the 500 known sequentially hermaphroditic fish species are protogynous. Common model organisms for this type of sequential hermaphroditism are wrasses. They are one of the largest families of coral reef fish and belong to the Labridae family. Wrasses are found around the world in all marine habitats and tend to bury themselves in sand at night or when they feel threatened. In wrasses, the larger of the two fish is the male, while the smaller is the female. In most cases, females and immature have a uniform color while the male has the terminal bicolored phase. Large males hold territories and try to pair spawn while small to mid-size initial-phase males live with females and group spawn. In other words, both the initial and terminal phase males can breed; they differ however in the way they do it.\n\nIn the California sheephead (\"Semicossyphus pulcher\"), a type of wrasse, when the female changes to male, the ovaries degenerate and spermatogenic crypts appear in the gonads. The general structure of the gonads remains ovarian after the transformation and the sperm is transported through a series of ducts on the periphery of the gonad and oviduct. Here sex change is age-dependent. For example, the California sheephead stays a female for four years before changing sex.\n\nBlue-headed wrasse begin life as males or females, but females can change sex and function as males. Young females and males start with a distinct coloration known as the \"Initial Phase\" before progressing into the \"Terminal Phase\" coloration, which has a change in intensity of color, stripes, and bars. Initial Phase males have larger testes than larger, terminal phase males, which enables the initial phase males to produce a large amount of sperm. This strategy is able to compete with that of the larger male, who is able to guard his own harem.\n\n\"Botryllus schlosseri\", a colonial tunicate, is a protogynous hermaphrodite. In a colony, eggs are ovulated about two days before the peak of sperm emission. Although self-fertilization is avoided and cross-fertilization favored by this strategy, self-fertilization is still possible. Self-fertilized eggs develop with a substantially higher frequency of anomalies during cleavage than cross-fertilized eggs (23% vs. 1.6%). Also a significantly lower percentage of larvae derived from self-fertilized eggs metamorphose, and the growth of the colonies derived from their metamorphosis is significantly lower. These findings suggest that self-fertilization gives rise to inbreeding depression associated with developmental deficits that are likely caused by expression of deleterious recessive mutations.\n\nOther examples of protogynous organisms include:\n\nGhiselin proposed three models for hermaphroditism in 1969 in his paper titled “The evolution of hermaphroditism among animals”.\n\n\nIn most ectotherms body size and female fecundity are positively correlated. This supports Ghiselin’s size-advantage model, which is still widely accepted today. Kazancioglu and Alonzo (2010) performed the first comparative analysis of sex change in Labridae. Their analysis supports the size-advantage model by Ghiselin and suggest that sequential hermaphroditism is correlated to the size-advantage. They determined that dioecy was less likely to occur when the size advantage is stronger than other advantages\n\nWarner suggests that selection for protandry may occur in populations where female fecundity is augmented with age and individuals mate randomly. Selection for protogyny may occur where there are traits in the population that depress male fecundity at early ages (territoriality, mate selection or inexperience) and when female fecundity is decreased with age, the latter seems to be rare in the field. An example of territoriality favoring protogyny occurs when there is a need to protect their habitat and being a large male is advantageous for this purpose. In the mating aspect, a large male has a higher chance of mating, while this has no effect on the female mating fitness. Thus, he suggests that female fecundity has more impact on sequential hermaphroditism than the age structures of the population.\n\nThe size-advantage model predicts that sex change would only be absent if the relationship between size/age with reproductive potential is identical in both sexes. With this prediction one would assume that hermaphroditism is very common, but this is not the case. Sequential hermaphroditism is very rare and according to scientists this is due to some cost that decreases fitness in sex changers as opposed to those who don’t change sex. Some of the hypotheses proposed for the dearth of hermaphrodites are the energetic cost of sex change, genetic and/or physiological barriers to sex change, and sex-specific mortality rates.\n\nIn 2009, Kazanciglu and Alonzo found that dioecy was only favored when the cost of changing sex was very large. This indicates that the cost of sex change does not explain the rarity of sequential hermaphroditism by itself.\n\nMany studies have focused on the proximate causes of sequential hermaphroditism. The role of aromatase has been widely studied in this area. Aromatase is an enzyme that controls the androgen/estrogen ratio in animals by catalyzing the conversion of testosterone into oestradiol, which is irreversible. It has been discovered that the aromatase pathway mediates sex change in both directions. Many studies also involve understanding the effect of aromatase inhibitors on sex change. One such study was performed by Kobayashi et al. In their study they tested the role of estrogens in male three-spot wrasses (\"Halichoeres trimaculatus\"). They discovered that fish treated with aromatase inhibitors showed decreased gonodal weight, plasma estrogen level and spermatogonial proliferation in the testis as well as increased androgen levels. Their results suggest that estrogens are important in the regulation of spermatogenesis in this protogynous hermaphrodite.\n\nSequential hermaphrodites almost always have a sex ratio biased towards the birth sex, and consequently experience significantly more reproductive success after switching sexes. In theory, this should decrease genetic diversity and effective population size (Ne). However, a study of two ecologically similar santer sea bream (gonochoric) and slinger sea bream (protogynous) in South African waters found that genetic diversities were similar in the two species, and while Ne was lower in the instant for the sex-changer, they were similar over a relatively short time horizion.\n\nIn the context of the plant sexuality of flowering plants (angiosperms), there are two forms of dichogamy: protogyny—female function precedes male function—and protandry—male function precedes female function.\n\nHistorically, dichogamy has been regarded as a mechanism for reducing inbreeding (e.g., Darwin, 1862). However, a survey of the angiosperms found that self-incompatible (SI) plants, which are incapable of inbreeding, were as likely to be dichogamous as were self-compatible (SC) plants (Bertin, 1993). This finding led to a reinterpretation of dichogamy as a more general mechanism for reducing the impact of pollen-pistil interference on pollen import and export (reviewed in Lloyd & Webb, 1986; Barrett, 2002). Unlike the inbreeding avoidance hypothesis, which focused on female function, this interference-avoidance hypothesis considers both reproductive functions.\n\nIn many hermaphroditic species, the close physical proximity of anthers and stigma makes interference unavoidable, either within a flower or between flowers on an inflorescence. Within-flower interference, which occurs when either the pistil interrupts pollen removal or the anthers prevent pollen deposition, can result in autonomous or facilitated self-pollination (Lloyd & Webb, 1986; Lloyd & Schoen, 1992). Between-flower interference results from similar mechanisms, except that the interfering structures occur on different flowers within the same inflorescence and it requires pollinator activity. This results in geitonogamous pollination, the transfer of pollen between flowers of the same individual (Lloyd & Schoen, 1992; de Jong et al., 1993). In contrast to within-flower interference, geitonogamy necessarily involves the same processes as outcrossing: pollinator attraction, reward provisioning, and pollen removal. Therefore, between-flower interference not only carries the cost of self-fertilization (inbreeding depression; Charlesworth & Charlesworth, 1987; Husband & Schemske, 1996), but also reduces the amount of pollen available for export (so-called \"pollen discounting\"; Harder & Wilson, 1998]). Because pollen discounting diminishes outcross siring success, interference avoidance may be an important evolutionary force in floral biology (Harder & Barrett, 1995, 1996; Harder & Wilson, 1998; Barrett, 2002).\n\nDichogamy may reduce between-flower interference by minimizing the temporal overlap between stigma and anthers within an inflorescence. Large inflorescences attract more pollinators, potentially enhancing reproductive success by increasing pollen import and export (Schemske, 1980; Queller, 1983; Bell, 1985; Geber, 1985; Schmid-Hempel & Speiser, 1988; Klinkhamer & de Jong, 1990). However, large inflorescences also increase the opportunities for both geitonogamy and pollen discounting, so that the opportunity for between-flower interference increases with inflorescence size (Harder & Barrett, 1996). Consequently, the evolution of floral display size may represent a compromise between maximizing pollinator visitation and minimizing geitonogamy and pollen discounting (Klinkhamer & de Jong, 1993; Barrett et al., 1994; Holsinger, 1996; Snow et al., 1996).\n\nProtandry may be particularly relevant to this compromise, because it often results in an inflorescence structure with female phase flowers positioned below male phase flowers (Bertin & Newman, 1993). Given the tendency of many insect pollinators to forage upwards through inflorescences (Galen & Plowright, 1988), protandry may enhance pollen export by reducing between-flower interference (Darwin, 1862; Harder et al., 2000). Furthermore, this enhanced pollen export should increase as floral display size increases, because between-flower interference should increase with floral display size. These effects of protandry on between-flower interference may decouple the benefits of large inflorescences from the consequences of geitonogamy and pollen discounting. Such a decoupling would provide a significant reproductive advantage through increased pollinator visitation and siring success.\n\nHarder et al. (2000) demonstrated experimentally that dichogamy both reduced rates of self-fertilization and enhanced outcross siring success through reductions in geitonogamy and pollen discounting, respectively. Routley & Husband (2003) examined the influence of inflorescence size on this siring advantage and found a bimodal distribution with increased siring success with both small and large display sizes.\n\nThe length of stigmatic receptivity plays a key role in regulating the isolation of the male and female stages in dichogamous plants, and stigmatic receptivity can be influenced by both temperature and humidity. Another study by Jersakova and Johnson, studied the effects of protandry on the pollination process of the moth pollinated orchid, ‘’Satyrium longicauda’’. They discovered that protandry tended to reduce the absolute levels of self-pollination and suggest that the evolution of protandry could be driven by the consequences of the pollination process for male mating success. Another study that indicated that dichogamy might increase male pollination success was the study performed by Dai and Galloway.\n\n\n", "id": "1656730", "title": "Sequential hermaphroditism"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2301322", "text": "Superfecundation\n\nSuperfecundation is the fertilization of two or more ova from the same cycle by sperm from separate acts of sexual intercourse, which can lead to twin babies from two separate biological fathers. The term superfecundation is derived from fecund, meaning the ability to produce offspring. Heteropaternal superfecundation refers to the fertilization of two separate ova by two different fathers. Homopaternal superfecundation refers to the fertilization of two separate ova from the same father, leading to fraternal twins. While heteropaternal superfecundation is referred to as a form of atypical twinning, genetically, the twins are half siblings. Superfecundation, while rare, can occur through either separate occurrences of sexual intercourse or through artificial insemination.\n\nSuperfecundation most commonly happens within hours or days of the first instance of fertilization with ova released during the same cycle. The time window when eggs are able to be fertilized is small. Sperm cells can live inside a female's body for four to five days. Once ovulation occurs, the egg remains viable for 12–48 hours before it begins to disintegrate. Thus, the fertile period can span five to seven days.\n\nOvulation is usually suspended during pregnancy to prevent further ova becoming fertilized and to help increase the chances of a full-term pregnancy. However, if an ovum is released after the female was already impregnated when previously ovulating, a chance of a second pregnancy occurs, albeit at a different stage of development. This is known as superfetation.\n\nHeteropaternal superfecundation is common in animals such as cats and dogs. Stray dogs can produce litters in which every puppy has a different sire. Though rare in humans, cases have been documented. In one study on humans, the frequency was 2.4% among dizygotic twins whose parents had been involved in paternity suits.\n\nKoen and Teun Stuart, Dutch boys who were the result of in vitro fertilization (IVF). In a mixup at the laboratory, equipment had been used twice, causing another man’s sperm to be mixed with the intended father's.\n\nIn 1995, a young woman gave birth to diamniotic monochorionic twins, who were originally assumed to be monozygotic twins until a paternity suit led to a DNA test. This led to the discovery that the twins had different fathers.\n\nIn 1982, twins who were born with two different skin colors were discovered to be conceived as a result of heteropaternal superfecundation.\n\nIn 2001, a case of spontaneous monopaternal superfecundation was reported after a woman undergoing IVF treatments gave birth to quintuplets after only two embryos were implanted. Genetic testing supported that the twinning was not a result of the embryos splitting, and that all five boys shared the same father.\n\nIn 2016, an IVF-implanted surrogate mother gave birth to two children: one genetically unrelated child from an implanted embryo, and a biological child from her own egg and her husband's sperm.\n\n\n", "id": "2301322", "title": "Superfecundation"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57880", "text": "In vitro fertilisation\n\nIn vitro fertilisation (IVF) is a process of fertilisation where an egg is combined with sperm outside the body, in vitro (\"in glass\"). The process involves monitoring and stimulating a woman's ovulatory process, removing an ovum or ova (egg or eggs) from the woman's ovaries and letting sperm fertilise them in a liquid in a laboratory. The fertilised egg (zygote) undergoes embryo culture for 2–6 days, and is then transferred to the same or another woman's uterus, with the intention of establishing a successful pregnancy.\n\nIVF is a type of assisted reproductive technology used for infertility treatment and gestational surrogacy, in which a fertilised egg is implanted into a surrogate's uterus, and the resulting child is genetically unrelated to the surrogate. Some countries banned or otherwise regulate the availability of IVF treatment, giving rise to fertility tourism. Restrictions on availability of IVF include costs and age to carry a healthy pregnancy to term. IVF is mostly attempted if less invasive or expensive options have failed or are unlikely to work.\n\nThe first successful birth of a child after IVF treatment, Louise Brown, occurred in 1978. Louise Brown was born as a result of natural cycle IVF where no stimulation was made. The procedure took place at Dr Kershaw's Cottage Hospital (now Dr Kershaw's Hospice) in Royton, Oldham. Robert G. Edwards was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 2010, the physiologist who co-developed the treatment together with Patrick Steptoe; Steptoe was not eligible for consideration as the Nobel Prize is not awarded posthumously. With egg donation and IVF, women who are past their reproductive years or have reached menopause can still become pregnant. Adriana Iliescu held the record as the oldest woman to give birth using IVF and donated egg, when she gave birth in 2004 at the age of 66, a record passed in 2006. After the IVF treatment many couples are able to get pregnant without any fertility treatments. In 2012 it was estimated that five million children had been born worldwide using IVF and other assisted reproduction techniques. \n\nFrom Latin meaning \"in glass\", the term \"in vitro\" is used because early biological experiments involving cultivation of tissues outside the living organism from which they came, were carried out in glass containers such as beakers, test tubes, or petri dishes.\n\nToday, the scientific term \"in vitro\" is used to refer to any biological procedure that is performed outside the organism in which it would normally have occurred, to distinguish it from an in vivo procedure, where the tissue remains inside the living organism within which it is normally found. A colloquial term for babies conceived as the result of IVF, \"test tube babies\", refers to the tube-shaped containers of glass or plastic resin, called \"test tubes,\" that are commonly used in chemistry labs and biology labs. However, IVF is usually performed in the shallower containers called Petri dishes. One IVF method, autologous endometrial coculture, is actually performed on organic material, but is still considered IVF.\n\nIVF may be used to overcome female infertility where it is due to problems with the fallopian tubes, making in vivo fertilisation difficult. It can also assist in male infertility, in those cases where there is a defect in sperm quality; in such situations intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) may be used, where a sperm cell is injected directly into the egg cell. This is used when sperm has difficulty penetrating the egg, and in these cases the partner's or a donor's sperm may be used. ICSI is also used when sperm numbers are very low. When indicated, the use of ICSI has been found to increase the success rates of IVF.\n\nAccording to UK's guidelines, IVF treatment is appropriate in cases of unexplained infertility for women that have not conceived after 2 years of regular unprotected sexual intercourse. This rule does not apply to all countries.\n\nIVF is also considered suitable in cases where any of its expansions is of interest, that is, a procedure that is usually not necessary for the IVF procedure itself, but would be virtually impossible or technically difficult to perform without concomitantly performing methods of IVF. Such expansions include preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) to rule out presence of genetic disorders, as well as egg donation or surrogacy where the woman providing the egg isn't the same who will carry the pregnancy to term. Further details in the Expansions-section below.\n\nIVF success rates, the percentage of all IVF procedures which result in a favourable outcome. Depending on the type of calculation used, this outcome may represent the number of confirmed pregnancies, called the pregnancy rate, or the number of live births, called the live birth rate. The success rate depends on variable factors such as maternal age, cause of infertility, embryo status, reproductive history and lifestyle factors.\n\nMaternal age: Younger candidates of IVF are more likely to get pregnant. Women older than 41 are more likely to get pregnant with a donor egg.\n\nReproductive history: Women who have been previously pregnant are in many cases more successful with IVF treatments than those who have never been pregnant.\n\nDue to advances in reproductive technology, IVF success rates are substantially higher today than they were just a few years ago.\n\nThe live birth rate is the percentage of all IVF cycles that lead to a live birth. This rate does not include miscarriage or stillbirth and multiple-order births such as twins and triplets are counted as one pregnancy. A 2012 summary compiled by the Society for Reproductive Medicine which reports the average IVF success rates in the United States per age group using non-donor eggs compiled the following data:\n\nIn 2006, Canadian clinics reported a live birth rate of 27%. Birth rates in younger patients were slightly higher, with a success rate of 35.3% for those 21 and younger, the youngest group evaluated. Success rates for older patients were also lower and decrease with age, with 37-year-olds at 27.4% and no live births for those older than 48, the oldest group evaluated. Some clinics exceeded these rates, but it is impossible to determine if that is due to superior technique or patient selection, because it is possible to artificially increase success rates by refusing to accept the most difficult patients or by steering them into oocyte donation cycles (which are compiled separately). Further, pregnancy rates can be increased by the placement of several embryos at the risk of increasing the chance for multiples.\n\nThe live birth rates using donor eggs are also given by the SART and include all age groups using either fresh or thawed eggs.\n\nBecause not each IVF cycle that is started will lead to oocyte retrieval or embryo transfer, reports of live birth rates need to specify the denominator, namely IVF cycles started, IVF retrievals, or embryo transfers. The Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology (SART) summarised 2008-9 success rates for US clinics for fresh embryo cycles that did not involve donor eggs and gave live birth rates by the age of the prospective mother, with a peak at 41.3% per cycle started and 47.3% per embryo transfer for patients under 35 years of age.\n\nIVF attempts in multiple cycles result in increased cumulative live birth rates. Depending on the demographic group, one study reported 45% to 53% for three attempts, and 51% to 71% to 80% for six attempts.\n\nPregnancy rate may be defined in various ways. In the United States, the pregnancy rate used by the Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology and the Centers for Disease Control (and appearing in the table in the Success Rates section above) are based on fetal heart motion observed in ultrasound examinations.\n\nThe 2009 summary compiled by the Society for Reproductive Medicine included the following data for the United States:\n\nIn 2006, Canadian clinics reported an average pregnancy rate of 35%. A French study estimated that 66% of patients starting IVF treatment finally succeed in having a child (40% during the IVF treatment at the centre and 26% after IVF discontinuation). Achievement of having a child after IVF discontinuation was mainly due to adoption (46%) or spontaneous pregnancy (42%).\n\nThe main potential factors that influence pregnancy (and live birth) rates in IVF have been suggested to be maternal age, duration of infertility or subfertility, bFSH and number of oocytes, all reflecting ovarian function. Optimal woman’s age is 23–39 years at time of treatment.\nBiomarkers that affect the pregnancy chances of IVF include:\n\nOther determinants of outcome of IVF include:\n\nAspirin is sometimes prescribed to women for the purpose of increasing the chances of conception by IVF, but as of 2016 there was no evidence to show that it is safe and effective.\n\nA 2013 review and metaanalysis of randomised controlled trials of acupuncture as an adjuvant therapy in IVF found no overall benefit, and concluded that an apparent benefit detected in a subset of published trials where the control group (those not using acupuncture) experienced a lower than average rate of pregnancy requires further study, due to the possibility of publication bias and other factors.\n\nA Cochrane review came to the result that endometrial injury performed in the month prior to ovarian induction appeared to increase both the live birth rate and clinical pregnancy rate in IVF compared with no endometrial injury. There was no evidence of a difference between the groups in miscarriage, multiple pregnancy or bleeding rates. Evidence suggested that endometrial injury on the day of oocyte retrieval was associated with a lower live birth or ongoing pregnancy rate.\n\nFor women, intake of antioxidants (such as N-acetyl-cysteine, melatonin, vitamin A, vitamin C, vitamin E, folic acid, myo-inositol, zinc or selenium) has not been associated with a significantly increased live birth rate or clinical pregnancy rate in IVF according to Cochrane reviews. The review found that oral antioxidants given to men in couples with male factor or unexplained subfertility may improve live birth rates, but more evidence is needed.\n\nA Cochrane review in 2015 came to the result that there is no evidence identified regarding the effect of pre-conception lifestyle advice on the chance of a live birth outcome.\n\nThe major complication of IVF is the risk of multiple births. This is directly related to the practice of transferring multiple embryos at embryo transfer. Multiple births are related to increased risk of pregnancy loss, obstetrical complications, prematurity, and neonatal morbidity with the potential for long term damage. Strict limits on the number of embryos that may be transferred have been enacted in some countries (e.g. Britain, Belgium) to reduce the risk of high-order multiples (triplets or more), but are not universally followed or accepted. Spontaneous splitting of embryos in the womb after transfer can occur, but this is rare and would lead to identical twins. A double blind, randomised study followed IVF pregnancies that resulted in 73 infants (33 boys and 40 girls) and reported that 8.7% of singleton infants and 54.2% of twins had a birth weight of < .\n\nRecent evidence also suggest that singleton offspring after IVF is at higher risk for lower birth weight for unknown reasons.\n\nCertain kinds of IVF, in particular ICSI (first applied in 1991) and blastocyst transfer (first applied in 1984) have been shown to lead to distortions in the sex ratio at birth. ICSI leads to slightly more female births (51.3% female) while blastocyst transfer leads to significantly more boys (56.1% male) being born. Standard IVF done at the second or third day leads to a normal sex ratio.\n\nEpigenetic modifications caused by extended culture leading to the death of more female embryos has been theorised as the reason why blastocyst transfer leads to a higher male sex ratio, however adding retinoic acid to the culture can bring this ratio back to normal.\n\nBy sperm washing, the risk that a chronic disease in the male providing the sperm would infect the female or offspring can be brought to negligible levels.\n\nIn males with hepatitis B, The Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine advises that sperm washing is not necessary in IVF to prevent transmission, unless the female partner has not been effectively vaccinated. In females with hepatitis B, the risk of vertical transmission during IVF is no different from the risk in spontaneous conception. However, there is not enough evidence to say that ICSI procedures are safe in females with hepatitis B in regard to vertical transmission to the offspring.\n\nRegarding potential spread of HIV/AIDS, Japan's government prohibited the use of IVF procedures for couples in which both partners are infected with HIV. Despite the fact that the ethics committees previously allowed the Ogikubo, Tokyo Hospital, located in Tokyo, to use IVF for couples with HIV, the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare of Japan decided to block the practice. Hideji Hanabusa, the vice president of the Ogikubo Hospital, states that together with his colleagues, he managed to develop a method through which scientists are able to remove HIV from sperm.\n\nA risk of ovarian stimulation is the development of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome, particularly if hCG is used for inducing final oocyte maturation. This results in swollen, painful ovaries. It occurs in 30% of patients. Mild cases can be treated with over the counter medications and cases can be resolved in the absence of pregnancy. In moderate cases, ovaries swell and fluid accumulated in the abdominal cavities and may have symptoms of heartburn, gas, nausea or loss of appetite. In severe cases patients have sudden excess abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting and will result in hospitalisation.\n\nDuring egg retrieval, there exists a small chance of bleeding, infection, and damage to surrounding structures like bowel and bladder (transvaginal ultrasound aspiration) as well as difficulty in breathing, chest infection, allergic reactions to medication, or nerve damage (laproscopy).\n\nEctopic pregnancy may also occur if a fertilised egg develops outside the uterus, usually in the fallopian tubes and requires immediate destruction of the fetus.\n\nIVF does not seem to be associated with an elevated risk of cervical cancer, nor with ovarian cancer or endometrial cancer when neutralising the confounder of infertility itself. Nor does it seem to impart any increased risk for breast cancer.\n\nRegardless of pregnancy result, IVF treatment is usually stressful for patients. Neuroticism and the use of escapist coping strategies are associated with a higher degree of distress, while the presence social support has a relieving effect. A negative pregnancy test after IVF is associated with an increased risk for depression in women, but not with any increased risk of developing anxiety disorders. Pregnancy test results do not seem to be a risk factor for depression or anxiety among men.\n\nA review in 2013 came to the result that infants resulting from IVF (with or without ICSI) have a relative risk of birth defects of 1.32 (95% confidence interval 1.24–1.42) compared to naturally conceived infants. In 2008, an analysis of the data of the National Birth Defects Study in the US found that certain birth defects were significantly more common in infants conceived through IVF, notably septal heart defects, cleft lip with or without cleft palate, esophageal atresia, and anorectal atresia; the mechanism of causality is unclear. However, in a population-wide cohort study of 308,974 births (with 6163 using assisted reproductive technology and following children from birth to age five) researchers found: \"The increased risk of birth defects associated with IVF was no longer significant after adjustment for parental factors.\" Parental factors included known independent risks for birth defects such as maternal age, smoking status, etc. Multivariate correction did not remove the significance of the association of birth defects and ICSI (corrected odds ratio 1.57), although the authors speculate that underlying male infertility factors (which would be associated with the use of ICSI) may contribute to this observation and were not able to correct for these confounders. The authors also found that a history of infertility elevated risk itself in the absence of any treatment (odds ratio 1.29), consistent with a Danish national registry study and \"...implicates patient factors in this increased risk.\" The authors of the Danish national registry study speculate: \"...our results suggest that the reported increased prevalence of congenital malformations seen in singletons born after assisted reproductive technology is partly due to the underlying infertility or its determinants.\"\n\nIf the underlying infertility is related to abnormalities in spermatogenesis, it is plausible, but too early to examine that male offspring are at higher risk for sperm abnormalities.\n\nIVF does not seem to confer any risks regarding cognitive development, school performance, social functioning, and behaviour. Also, IVF infants are known to be as securely attached to their parents as those who were naturally conceived, and IVF adolescents are as well-adjusted as those who have been naturally conceived.\n\nLimited long-term follow-up data suggest that IVF may be associated with an increased incidence of hypertension, impaired fasting glucose, increase in total body fat composition, advancement of bone age, subclinical thyroid disorder, early adulthood clinical depression and binge drinking in the offspring. It is not known, however, whether these potential associations are caused by the IVF procedure in itself, by adverse obstetric outcomes associated with IVF, by the genetic origin of the children or by yet unknown IVF-associated causes. Increases in embryo manipulation during IVF result in more deviant fetal growth curves, but birth weight does not seem to be a reliable marker of fetal stress.\n\nIVF, including ICSI, is associated with an increased risk of imprinting disorders (including Prader-Willi syndrome and Angelman syndrome), with an odds ratio of 3.7 (95% confidence interval 1.4 to 9.7).\n\nAn IVF-associated incidence of cerebral palsy and neurodevelopmental delay are believed to be related to the confounders of prematurity and low birthweight. Similarly, an IVF-associated incidence of autism and attention-deficit disorder are believed to be related to confounders of maternal and obstetric factors.\n\nOverall, IVF does not cause an increased risk of childhood cancer. Studies have shown a decrease in the risk of certain cancers and an increased risks of certain others including retinoblastoma hepatoblastoma and rhabdomyosarcoma.\n\nTheoretically, IVF could be performed by collecting the contents from a woman's fallopian tubes or uterus after natural ovulation, mixing it with sperm, and reinserting the fertilised ova into the uterus. However, without additional techniques, the chances of pregnancy would be extremely small. The additional techniques that are routinely used in IVF include ovarian hyperstimulation to generate multiple eggs or ultrasound-guided transvaginal oocyte retrieval directly from the ovaries; after which the ova and sperm are prepared, as well as culture and selection of resultant embryos before embryo transfer into a uterus.\n\nOvarian hyperstimulation is the stimulation to induce development of multiple follicles of the ovaries. It should start with response prediction by e.g. age, antral follicle count and level of anti-Müllerian hormone. The resulting prediction of e.g. poor or hyper-response to ovarian hyperstimulation determines the protocol and dosage for ovarian hyperstimulation.\n\nOvarian hyperstimulation also includes suppression of spontaneous ovulation, for which two main methods are available: Using a (usually longer) GnRH agonist protocol or a (usually shorter) GnRH antagonist protocol. In a standard long GnRH agonist protocol the day when hyperstimulation treatment is started and the expected day of later oocyte retrieval can be chosen to conform to personal choice, while in a GnRH antagonist protocol it must be adapted to the spontaneous onset of the previous menstruation. On the other hand, the GnRH antagonist protocol has a lower risk of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS), which is a life-threatening complication.\n\nFor the ovarian hyperstimulation in itself, injectable gonadotropins (usually FSH analogues) are generally used under close monitoring. Such monitoring frequently checks the estradiol level and, by means of gynecologic ultrasonography, follicular growth. Typically approximately 10 days of injections will be necessary.\n\nThere are several methods termed \"natural cycle IVF\":\n\nIVF using no drugs for ovarian hyperstimulation was the method for the conception of Louise Brown. This method can be successfully used when women want to avoid taking ovarian stimulating drugs with its associated side-effects. HFEA has estimated the live birth rate to be approximately 1.3% per IVF cycle using no hyperstimulation drugs for women aged between 40–42.\n\nMild IVF is a method where a small dose of ovarian stimulating drugs are used for a short duration during a woman’s natural cycle aimed at producing 2–7 eggs and creating healthy embryos. This method appears to be an advance in the field to reduce complications and side-effects for women and it is aimed at quality, and not quantity of eggs and embryos. One study comparing a mild treatment (mild ovarian stimulation with GnRH antagonist co-treatment combined with single embryo transfer) to a standard treatment (stimulation with a GnRH agonist long-protocol and transfer of two embryos) came to the result that the proportions of cumulative pregnancies that resulted in term live birth after 1 year were 43.4% with mild treatment and 44.7% with standard treatment. Mild IVF can be cheaper than conventional IVF and with a significantly reduced risk of multiple gestation and OHSS.\n\nWhen the ovarian follicles have reached a certain degree of development, induction of final oocyte maturation is performed, generally by an injection of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG). Commonly, this is known as the \"trigger shot.\" hCG acts as an analogue of luteinising hormone, and ovulation would occur between 38 and 40 hours after a single HCG injection, but the egg retrieval is performed at a time usually between 34 and 36 hours after hCG injection, that is, just prior to when the follicles would rupture. This avails for scheduling the egg retrieval procedure at a time where the eggs are fully mature. HCG injection confers a risk of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome. Using a GnRH agonist instead of hCG eliminates most of the risk of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome, but with a reduced delivery rate if the embryos are transferred fresh. For this reason, many centers will freeze all oocytes or embryos following agonist trigger.\n\nThe eggs are retrieved from the patient using a transvaginal technique called transvaginal oocyte retrieval, involving an ultrasound-guided needle piercing the vaginal wall to reach the ovaries. Through this needle follicles can be aspirated, and the follicular fluid is passed to an embryologist to identify ova. It is common to remove between ten and thirty eggs. The retrieval procedure usually takes between 20 and 40 minutes, depending on the number of mature follicles, and is usually done under conscious sedation or general anaesthesia.\n\nIn the laboratory, the identified eggs are stripped of surrounding cells and prepared for fertilisation. An oocyte selection may be performed prior to fertilisation to select eggs with optimal chances of successful pregnancy. In the meantime, semen is prepared for fertilisation by removing inactive cells and seminal fluid in a process called sperm washing. If semen is being provided by a sperm donor, it will usually have been prepared for treatment before being frozen and quarantined, and it will be thawed ready for use.\n\nThe sperm and the egg are incubated together at a ratio of about 75,000:1 in a culture media in order for the actual fertilisation to take place. A review in 2013 came to the result that a duration of this co-incubation of about 1 to 4 hours results in significantly higher pregnancy rates than 16 to 24 hours. In most cases, the egg will be fertilised during co-incubation and will show two pronuclei. In certain situations, such as low sperm count or motility, a single sperm may be injected directly into the egg using intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI). The fertilised egg is passed to a special growth medium and left for about 48 hours until the egg consists of six to eight cells.\n\nIn gamete intrafallopian transfer, eggs are removed from the woman and placed in one of the fallopian tubes, along with the man's sperm. This allows fertilisation to take place inside the woman's body. Therefore, this variation is actually an in vivo fertilisation, not in vitro.\n\nThe main durations of embryo culture are until cleavage stage (day two to four after co-incubation) or the blastocyst stage (day five or six after co-incubation). Embryo culture until the blastocyst stage confers a significant increase in live birth rate per embryo transfer, but also confers a decreased number of embryos available for transfer and embryo cryopreservation, so the cumulative clinical pregnancy rates are increased with cleavage stage transfer. Transfer day two instead of day three after fertilisation has no differences in live birth rate. There are significantly higher odds of preterm birth (odds ratio 1.3) and congenital anomalies (odds ratio 1.3) among births having from embryos cultured until the blastocyst stage compared with cleavage stage.\n\nLaboratories have developed grading methods to judge oocyte and embryo quality. In order to optimise pregnancy rates, there is significant evidence that a morphological scoring system is the best strategy for the selection of embryos. Since 2009 where the first time-lapse microscopy system for IVF was approved for clinical use, morphokinetic scoring systems has shown to improve to pregnancy rates further. However, when all different types of time-lapse embryo imaging devices, with or without morphokinetic scoring systems, are compared against conventional embryo assessment for IVF, there is insufficient evidence of a difference in live-birth, pregnancy, stillbirth or miscarriage to choose between them.\n\nEmbryos are graded by the embryologist based on the number of cells, evenness of growth and degree of fragmentation. The number to be transferred depends on the number available, the age of the woman and other health and diagnostic factors. In countries such as Canada, the UK, Australia and New Zealand, a maximum of two embryos are transferred except in unusual circumstances. In the UK and according to HFEA regulations, a woman over 40 may have up to three embryos transferred, whereas in the USA, younger women may have many embryos transferred based on individual fertility diagnosis. Most clinics and country regulatory bodies seek to minimise the risk of pregnancies carrying multiples, as it is not uncommon for more implantations to take than desired. The embryos judged to be the \"best\" are transferred to the patient's uterus through a thin, plastic catheter, which goes through her vagina and cervix. Several embryos may be passed into the uterus to improve chances of implantation and pregnancy.\n\nLuteal support is the administration of medication, generally progesterone, progestins or GnRH agonists, to increase the success rate of implantation and early embryogenesis, thereby complementing and/or supporting the function of the corpus luteum. A Cochrane review found that hCG or progesterone given during the luteal phase may be associated with higher rates of live birth or ongoing pregnancy, but that the evidence is not conclusive. Co-treatment with GnRH agonists appears to improve outcomes, by a live birth rate RD of +16% (95% confidence interval +10 to +22%).\n\nOn the other hand, growth hormone or aspirin as adjunctive medication in IVF have no evidence of overall benefit.\n\nThere are various expansions or additional techniques that can be applied in IVF, which are usually not necessary for the IVF procedure itself, but would be virtually impossible or technically difficult to perform without concomitantly performing methods of IVF.\n\nPreimplantation genetic screening (PGS) or preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) has been suggested to be able to be used in IVF to select an embryo that appears to have the greatest chances for successful pregnancy. However, a systematic review and meta-analysis of existing randomised controlled trials came to the result that there is no evidence of a beneficial effect of PGS with cleavage-stage biopsy as measured by live birth rate. On the contrary, for women of advanced maternal age, PGS with cleavage-stage biopsy significantly lowers the live birth rate. Technical drawbacks, such as the invasiveness of the biopsy, and non-representative samples because of mosaicism are the major underlying factors for inefficacy of PGS. some parents use gender selection for personal preference, which is a repercussion of this technology.\n\nStill, as an expansion of IVF, patients who can benefit from PGS/PGD include:\n\nPGS screens for numeral chromosomal abnormalities while PGD diagnosis the specific molecular defect of the inherited disease. In both PGS and PGD, individual cells from a pre-embryo, or preferably trophectoderm cells biopsied from a blastocyst, are analysed during the IVF process. Before the transfer of a pre-embryo back to a woman's uterus, one or two cells are removed from the pre-embryos (8-cell stage), or preferably from a blastocyst. These cells are then evaluated for normality. Typically within one to two days, following completion of the evaluation, only the normal pre-embryos are transferred back to the woman's uterus. Alternatively, a blastocyst can be cryopreserved via vitrification and transferred at a later date to the uterus. In addition, PGS can significantly reduce the risk of multiple pregnancies because fewer embryos, ideally just one, are needed for implantation.\n\nCryopreservation can be performed as oocyte cryopreservation before fertilisation, or as embryo cryopreservation after fertilisation.\n\nThe Rand Consulting Group has estimated there to be 400,000 frozen embryos in the United States in 2006. The advantage is that patients who fail to conceive may become pregnant using such embryos without having to go through a full IVF cycle. Or, if pregnancy occurred, they could return later for another pregnancy. Spare oocytes or embryos resulting from fertility treatments may be used for oocyte donation or embryo donation to another woman or couple, and embryos may be created, frozen and stored specifically for transfer and donation by using donor eggs and sperm. Also, oocyte cryopreservation can be used for women who are likely to lose their ovarian reserve due to undergoing chemotherapy.\n\nBy 2017, many centers have adopted embryo cryopreservation as their primary IVF therapy, and perform few or no fresh embryo transfers. The two main reasons for this have been better endometrial receptivity when embryos are transferred in cycles without exposure to ovarian stimulation and also the ability to store the embryos while awaiting the results of pre-implantation genetic testing.\n\nThe outcome from using cryopreserved embryos has uniformly been positive with no increase in birth defects or development abnormalities.\n\n\nThere may be leftover embryos or eggs from IVF procedures if the woman for whom they were originally created has successfully carried one or more pregnancies to term. With the woman's or couple's permission, these may be donated to help other women or couples as a means of third party reproduction.\n\nIn embryo donation, these extra embryos are given to other couples or women for transfer with the goal of producing a successful pregnancy. The resulting child is considered the child of the woman who carries it and gives birth, and not the child of the donor, the same as occurs with egg donation or sperm donation.\n\nTypically, genetic parents donate the eggs to a fertility clinic or where they are preserved by oocyte cryopreservation or embryo cryopreservation until a carrier is found for them. Typically the process of matching the embryo(s) with the prospective parents is conducted by the agency itself, at which time the clinic transfers ownership of the embryos to the prospective parents.\n\nIn the United States, women seeking to be an embryo recipient undergo infectious disease screening required by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), and reproductive tests to determine the best placement location and cycle timing before the actual Embryo Transfer occurs. The amount of screening the embryo has already undergone is largely dependent on the genetic parents' own IVF clinic and process. The embryo recipient may elect to have her own embryologist conduct further testing.\n\nAlternatives to donating unused embryos are destroying them (or having them implanted at a time where pregnancy is very unlikely), keeping them frozen indefinitely, or donating them for use in research (which results in their unviability). Individual moral views on disposing leftover embryos may depend on personal views on the beginning of human personhood and definition and/or value of potential future persons and on the value that is given to fundamental research questions. Some people believe donation of leftover embryos for research is a good alternative to discarding the embryos when patients receive proper, honest and clear information about the research project, the procedures and the scientific values.\n\nIn 1977, Steptoe and Edwards successfully carried out a pioneering conception which resulted in the birth of the world's first baby to be conceived by IVF, Louise Brown on 25 July 1978, in Oldham General Hospital, Greater Manchester, UK.\n\nThe second successful birth of a test tube baby occurred in India just 67 days after Louise Brown was born. The girl, named Durga conceived in vitro using the methods of Subhash Mukhopadhyay, a physician and researcher from Kolkata.\n\nIn some cases, laboratory mix-ups (misidentified gametes, transfer of wrong embryos) have occurred, leading to legal action against the IVF provider and complex paternity suits. An example is the case of a woman in California who received the embryo of another couple and was notified of this mistake after the birth of her son. This has led to many authorities and individual clinics implementing procedures to minimise the risk of such mix-ups. The HFEA, for example, requires clinics to use a double witnessing system, the identity of specimens is checked by two people at each point at which specimens are transferred. Alternatively, technological solutions are gaining favour, to reduce the manpower cost of manual double witnessing, and to further reduce risks with uniquely numbered RFID tags which can be identified by readers connected to a computer. The computer tracks specimens throughout the process and alerts the embryologist if non-matching specimens are identified. Although the use of RFID tracking has expanded in the USA, it is still not widely adopted. However, In other cases there has been not mix-up of embryos or gametes, but the intentional use of embryos of another couple or gamete donor, without informed consent of parents, both: receptors or donors. Some of these cases are taking a legal and judicial course.\n\nAnother concern is that people will screen in or out for particular traits, using preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) or preimplantation genetic screening. For example, a deaf British couple, Tom and Paula Lichy, have petitioned to create a deaf baby using IVF. Some medical ethicists have been very critical of this approach. Jacob M. Appel wrote that \"intentionally culling out blind or deaf embryos might prevent considerable future suffering, while a policy that allowed deaf or blind parents to select \"for\" such traits intentionally would be far more troublesome.\"\n\nThis concept of decisively altering genes has coined the concept of the Designer Baby. Currently, PGD can alter some physical and health attributes, and projections for the future power of PGD in its ability to create the ideal human has raised many ethical issues. Projections for societal repercussions include changing the realm of athletics, creating human weapons, and exchanging autonomy over one’s life course for predesignation. Also, with a limited view of the future, it is difficult to alter a human’s genetic makeup without knowing full repercussions. For example, through gene therapy, a lab was able to make rats lose weight, but the long-term effects of the gene manipulation lead to worry of toxin production and too much weight loss. To prevent some of these issues from arising, scientists work towards stabilising the entire process to make it safer before applying a higher degree of gene modification to the human embryos in IVF.\n\nFor those who believe that human life begins at the moment of conception, this belief also suggests that human rights are given at that time. If human rights are given in this embryonic stage, then a surplus of ethical issues arise from manipulating the embryo in the realm of tissue ownership. In the long run, if implanted into a female and born, the embryo becomes an adult and has to now live with the genetic modifications chosen for them through the process of IVF. Unfortunately, in this base, cellular state, consent for gene manipulation is impossible. \nThis leads to decision making by the parents. Rightful parental ownership over the embryo is only in the short-run and means that they control the embryos biological future. Consent over tissue ownership has been an issue for decades and can have legal repercussions. In the case of Henrietta Lacks, researchers lacked patient consent to use her tissues in genetic research, and this led to many legal issues on the family’s right to profit from the use of her cells. Decisiveness over autonomy is necessary in the case of IVF to avoid long run issues and give people their full rights of humanity.\n\nMany people do not oppose the IVF practice itself (i.e. the creating of a pregnancy through \"artificial\" ways) but are highly critical of the current state of the present day industry. Such individuals argue that the industry has now become a multibillion-dollar industry, which is widely unregulated and prone to serious abuses in the desire of practitioners to obtain profit. For instance, in 2008, a California physician transferred 12 embryos to a woman who gave birth to octuplets (see Suleman octuplets). This has made international news, and had led to accusations that many doctors are willing to seriously endanger the health and even life of women in order to gain money. Robert Winston, professor of fertility studies at Imperial College London, had called the industry \"corrupt\" and \"greedy\" saying that \"One of the major problems facing us in healthcare is that IVF has become a massive commercial industry,\" and that \"What has happened, of course, is that money is corrupting this whole technology\", and accused authorities of failing to protect couples from exploitation \"The regulatory authority has done a consistently bad job. It's not prevented the exploitation of women, it's not put out very good information to couples, it's not limited the number of unscientific treatments people have access to\". The IVF industry can thus be seen as an example of what social scientists are describing as an increasing trend towards a market-driven construction of health, medicine and the human body.\n\nAs the science progresses, the industry is further driven by money in that researchers and innovators enter into the fight over patents and intellectual property rights. The Copyright Clause in the US Constitution protects innovator’s rights to their respective work in attempts to promote scientific progress. Essentially, this lawful protection gives incentive to the innovators by providing them a temporary monopoly over their respective work. In the IVF industry, already incredibly expensive for patients, patents risk even higher prices for the patients to receive the procedure as they have to also cover the costs of protected works. For example, company 23andMe has patented a process used to calculate probability of gene inheritance. While this innovation could help many, the company retains sole right to administer it and thus does not have economic competition. Lack of economic competition leads to higher prices of products.\n\nThe industry has been accused of making unscientific claims, and distorting facts relating to infertility, in particular through widely exaggerated claims about how common infertility is in society, in an attempt to get as many couples as possible and as soon as possible to try treatments (rather than trying to conceive naturally for a longer time). This risks removing infertility from its social context and reducing the experience to a simple biological malfunction, which not only \"can\" be treated through bio-medical procedures, but \"should\" be treated by them. Indeed, there are serious concerns about the overuse of treatments, for instance Dr Sami David, a fertility specialist and one of the pioneers of the early days of the IVF treatments, has expressed disappointment over the current state of the industry, and said many procedures are unnecessary; he said: \"It's being the first choice of treatment rather than the last choice. When it was first opening up in late 1970s, early 80s, it was meant to be the last resort. Now it's a first resort. I think that's an injustice to women. I also think it can harm women in the long run.\" IVF thus raises ethical issues concerning the abuse of bio-medical facts to ‘sell’ corrective procedures and treatments for conditions that deviate from a constructed ideal of the ‘healthy’ or ‘normal’ body i.e., fertile females and males with reproductive systems capable of co-producing offspring.\n\nAlthough menopause is a natural barrier to further conception, IVF has allowed women to be pregnant in their fifties and sixties. Women whose uteruses have been appropriately prepared receive embryos that originated from an egg of an egg donor. Therefore, although these women do not have a genetic link with the child, they have an emotional link through pregnancy and childbirth. In many cases the genetic father of the child is the woman's partner. Even after menopause the uterus is fully capable of carrying out a pregnancy.\n\nAllowing women to get pregnant past the natural time can factor into issues of overpopulation. Through the PGD, children born through IVF would credibly have higher life expectancy rates due to eliminated diseases. So increasing the number of women who are able to bear children increases the population growth rate, while PGD in IVF decreases the death rate, resulting in an increasing population.\n\nA 2009 statement from the ASRM found no persuasive evidence that children are harmed or disadvantaged solely by being raised by single parents, unmarried parents, or homosexual parents. It did not support restricting access to assisted reproductive technologies on the basis of a prospective parent's marital status or sexual orientation.\n\nEthical concerns include reproductive rights, the welfare of offspring, nondiscrimination against unmarried individuals, homosexual, and professional autonomy.\n\nA recent controversy in California focused on the question of whether physicians opposed to same-sex relationships should be required to perform IVF for a lesbian couple. Guadalupe T. Benitez, a lesbian medical assistant from San Diego, sued doctors Christine Brody and Douglas Fenton of the North Coast Women's Care Medical Group after Brody told her that she had \"religious-based objections to treating her and homosexuals in general to help them conceive children by artificial insemination,\" and Fenton refused to authorise a refill of her prescription for the fertility drug Clomid on the same grounds. The California Medical Association had initially sided with Brody and Fenton, but the case, North Coast Women's Care Medical Group v. Superior Court, was decided unanimously by the California State Supreme Court in favour of Benitez on 19 August 2008.\n\nNadya Suleman came to international attention after having twelve embryos implanted, eight of which survived, resulting in eight newborns being added to her existing six-child family. The Medical Board of California sought to have fertility doctor Michael Kamrava, who treated Suleman, stripped of his licence. State officials allege that performing Suleman's procedure is evidence of unreasonable judgment, substandard care, and a lack of concern for the eight children she would conceive and the six she was already struggling to raise. On 1 June 2011 the Medical Board issued a ruling that Kamrava's medical licence be revoked effective 1 July 2011.\n\nSome children conceived by IVF using anonymous donors report being troubled over not knowing about their donor parent as well any genetic relatives they may have and their family history.\n\nAlana Stewart, who was conceived using donor sperm, began an online forum for donor children called AnonymousUS in 2010. The forum welcomes the viewpoints of anyone involved in the IVF process. Olivia Pratten, a donor-conceived Canadian, sued the province of British Columbia for access to records on her donor father's identity in 2008. \"I’m not a treatment, I’m a person, and those records belong to me,” Pratten said. In May 2012, a court ruled in Pratten's favour, agreeing that the laws at the time discriminated against donor children and making anonymous sperm and egg donation in British Columbia illegal.\n\nIn the U.K., Sweden, Norway, Germany, Italy, New Zealand, and some Australian states, donors are not paid and cannot be anonymous.\n\nIn 2000, a website called Donor Sibling Registry was created to help biological children with a common donor connect with each other.\n\nIn 2012, a documentary called \"Anonymous Father's Day\" was released that focuses on donor-conceived children.\n\nDuring the selection and transfer phases, many embryos may be discarded in favour of others. This selection may be based on criteria such as genetic disorders or the sex. One of the earliest cases of special gene selection through IVF was the case of the Collins family in the 1990s, who selected the sex of their child. The ethic issues remain unresolved as no consensus exists in science, religion, and philosophy on when a human embryo should be recognised as a person. For those who believe that this is at the moment of conception, IVF becomes a moral question when multiple eggs are fertilised, begin development, and only a few are chosen for implantation. \n\nIf IVF were to involve the fertilisation of only a single egg, or at least only the number that will be implanted, then this would not be an issue. However, this has the chance of increasing costs dramatically as only a few eggs can be attempted at a time. As a result, the couple must decide what to do with these extra embryos. Depending on their view of the embryo’s humanity or the chance the couple will want to try to have another child, the couple has multiple options for dealing with these extra embryos. Couples can choose to keep them frozen, donate them to other infertile couples, thaw them, or donate them to medical research. Keeping them frozen costs money, donating them does not ensure they will survive, thawing them renders them immediately unviable, and medical research results in their termination. In the realm of medical research, the couple is not necessarily told what the embryos will be used for, and as a result, some can be used in stem cell research, a field perceived to have ethical issues.\n\nThe Catholic Church opposes all kinds of assisted reproductive technology and artificial contraception, asserting they separate the procreative goal of marital sex from the goal of uniting married couples.\nThe Catholic Church permits the use of a small number of reproductive technologies and contraceptive methods like natural family planning, which involves charting ovulation times. The church allows other forms of reproductive technologies that allow conception to take place from normative sexual intercourse, such as a fertility lubricant. Pope Benedict XVI had publicly re-emphasised the Catholic Church's opposition to In vitro fertilisation, claiming it replaces love between a husband and wife.\n\nThe Catechism of the Catholic Church claims that Natural law teaches that reproduction has an \"inseparable connection\" to sexual union of married couples. In addition, the church opposes IVF because it might cause disposal of embryos; in Catholicism, an embryo is viewed as an individual with a soul that must be treated as a person. The Catholic Church maintains that it is not objectively evil to be infertile, and advocates adoption as an option for such couples who still wish to have children.\n\nHindus welcomed the IVF as gift for those who can't bear child and termed doctors related to IVF doing punya as there are several characters who were claimed to be born without intercourse, mainly Karna and five Pandavas.\n\nRegarding the response to IVF of Islam, the conclusions of Gad El-Hak Ali Gad El-Hak's ART fatwa include that:\n\nWithin the Orthodox Jewish community the concept is debated as there is little precedent in traditional Jewish legal textual sources. Regarding laws of sexuality, religious challenges include masturbation (which may be regarded as “seed wasting”), laws related to sexual activity and menstruation (niddah) and the specific laws regarding intercourse. An additional major issue is that of establishing paternity and lineage. For a baby conceived naturally, the father’s identity is determined by a legal presumption (chazakah) of legitimacy: \"rov bi'ot achar ha'baal\" - a woman's sexual relations are assumed to be with her husband. Regarding an IVF child, this assumption does not exist and as such Rabbi Eliezer Waldenberg (among others) requires an outside supervisor to positively identify the father. Reform Judaism has generally approved IVF.\n\nMany people of sub-Saharan Africa choose to foster their children to infertile women. IVF enables these infertile women to have their own children, which imposes new ideals to a culture in which fostering children is seen as both natural and culturally important. Many infertile women are able to earn more respect in their society by taking care of the children of other mothers, and this may be lost if they choose to use IVF instead. As IVF is seen as unnatural, it may even hinder their societal position as opposed to making them equal with fertile women. It is also economically advantageous for infertile women to raise foster children as it gives these children greater ability to access resources that are important for their development and also aids the development of their society at large. If IVF becomes more popular without the birth rate decreasing, there could be more large family homes with fewer options to send their newborn children. This could result in an increase of orphaned children and/or a decrease in resources for the children of large families. This would ultimately stifle the children's and the community's growth.\n\nStudies have indicated that IVF mothers show greater emotional involvement with their child, and they enjoy motherhood more than mothers by natural conception. Similarly, studies have indicated that IVF fathers express more warmth and emotional involvement than fathers by adoption and natural conception and enjoy fatherhood more. Some IVF parents become overly involved with their children.\n\nResearch has shown that men largely view themselves as ‘passive’ contributors since they have ‘less physical involvement' in IVF treatment. Despite this, many men feel distressed after seeing the toll of hormonal injections and ongoing physical intervention on their partner.\nFertility was found to be a significant factor in a man’s perception of his masculinity, driving many to keep the treatment a secret. In cases where the men did share that he and his partner were undergoing IVF, they reported to have been teased, mainly by other men, although some viewed this as an affirmation of support and friendship. For others, this led to feeling socially isolated. In comparison with women, men showed less deterioration in mental health in the years following a failed treatment. However many men did feel guilt, disappointment and inadequacy, stating that they were simply trying to provide an ‘emotional rock’ for their partners.\n\nHigh costs keep IVF out of reach for many developing countries, but research by the Genk Institute for Fertility Technology, in Belgium, claim to have found a much lower cost methodology (about 90% reduction) with similar efficacy, which may be suitable for some fertility treatment.\nMoreover, the laws of many countries permit IVF for only single women, lesbian couples, and persons participating in surrogacy arrangements. Using PGD gives members of these select demographic groups disproportionate access to a means of creating a child possessing characteristics that they consider \"ideal,\" raising issues of equal opportunity for both the parents'/parent's and the child's generation. Many fertile couples now demand equal access to embryonic screening so that their child can be just as healthy as one created through IVF. Mass use of PGD, especially as a means of population control or in the presence of legal measures related to population or demographic control, can lead to intentional or unintentional demographic effects such as the skewed live-birth sex ratios seen in communist China following implementation of its one-child policy.\n\nIn the USA, overall availability of IVF in 2005 was 2.5 IVF physicians per 100,000 population, and utilisation was 236 IVF cycles per 100,000. Utilisation highly increases with availability and IVF insurance coverage, and to a significant extent also with percentage of single persons and median income. In the USA 126 procedures are performed per million people per year. In the USA an average cycle, from egg retrieval to embryo implantation, costs $12,400, and insurance companies that do cover treatment, even partially, usually cap the number of cycles they pay for.\n\nThe cost of IVF rather reflects the costliness of the underlying healthcare system than the regulatory or funding environment, and ranges, on average for a standard IVF cycle and in 2006 United States dollars, between $12,500 in the United States to $4,000 in Japan. In Ireland, IVF costs around €4,000, with fertility drugs, if required, costing up to €3,000. The cost per live birth is highest in the United States ($41,000) and United Kingdom ($40,000) and lowest in Scandinavia and Japan (both around $24,500).\n\nMany fertility clinics in the United States limit the upper age at which women are eligible for IVF to 50 or 55 years. These cut-offs make it difficult for women older than fifty-five to utilise the procedure. \n\nIn Australia, the average age of women undergoing ART treatment is 35.5 years among those using their own eggs (one in four being 40 or older) and 40.5 years among those using donated eggs. while ivf is available in Australia, Australians are unable to choose their babies gender using ivf. \n\nErnestine Gwet Bell supervised the first Cameroonian child born through IVF in 1998.\n\nIsrael has the highest rate of IVF in the world, with 1657 procedures performed per million people per year. The second highest rate is in Iceland, with 899 procedures per million people per year. Israel provides unlimited free IVF procedures for its citizens for up to two children per woman under 45 years of age. In other countries the coverage of such procedures is limited if it exists at all. The Israeli Health Ministry says it spends roughly $3450 per procedure.\n\nAvailability of IVF in England is determined by Clinical commissioning groups. The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) recommends up to 3 cycles of treatment for women under 40 and one cycle for some women aged between 40 and 42, but financial pressure has eroded compliance with this recommendation. CCGs in Essex, Bedfordshire and Somerset have reduced funding to one cycle, or none, and it is expected that reductions will become more widespread. Funding may be available in “exceptional circumstances” – for example if a male partner has a transmittable infection or one partner is affected by cancer treatment. According to the campaign group Fertility Fairness at the end of 2014 every CCG in England was funding at least one cycle of IVF\". Prices paid by the NHS in England varied between under £3,000 to more than £6,000 in 2014/5. In February 2013, the cost of implementing the NICE guidelines for IVF along with other treatments for infertility was projected to be £236,000 per year per 100,000 members of the population.\n\nIVF increasingly appears on NHS treatments blacklists. In August 2017 five of the 208 CCGs had stopped funding IVF completely and others were considering doing so. By October 2017 only 25 CCGs were delivering the three recommended NHS IVF cycles to eligible women under 40. Policies could fall foul of discrimination laws if they treat same sex couples differently from heterosexual ones.\n\nThe penetration of the IVF market in India is quite low at present with only 2,800 cycles/million infertile women in the reproductive age group (20–44 years) as compared to China which has 6,500 cycles. The key challenges are lack of awareness, affordability and accessibility.\n\nGovernment agencies in China passed bans on the use of IVF in 2003 by unmarried women or by couples with certain infectious diseases.\n\nSunni Muslim nations generally allow IVF between married couples when conducted with their own respective sperm and eggs, but not with donor eggs from other couples. But Iran, which is Shi'a Muslim, has a more complex scheme. Iran bans sperm donation but allows donation of both fertilised and unfertilised eggs. Fertilised eggs are donated from married couples to other married couples, while unfertilised eggs are donated in the context of mut'ah or temporary marriage to the father.\n\nBy 2012 Costa Rica was the only country in the world with a complete ban on IVF technology, it having been ruled unconstitutional by the nation's Supreme Court because it \"violated life.\" Costa Rica had been the only country in the western hemisphere that forbade IVF. A law project sent reluctantly by the government of President Laura Chinchilla was rejected by parliament. President Chinchilla has not publicly stated her position on the question of IVF. However, given the massive influence of the Catholic Church in her government any change in the status quo seems very unlikely. In spite of Costa Rican government and strong religious opposition, the IVF ban has been struck down by the Inter-American Court of Human Rights in a decision of 20 December 2012. The court said that a long-standing Costa Rican guarantee of protection for every human embryo violated the reproductive freedom of infertile couples because it prohibited them from using IVF, which often involves the disposal of embryos not implanted in a patient’s uterus. On 10 September 2015, President Luis Guillermo Solís signed a decree legalising in-vitro fertilisation. The decree was added to the country's official gazette on 11 September. Opponents of the practice have since filed a lawsuit before the country's Constitutional Court.\n\nAll major restrictions on single but infertile women using IVF were lifted in Australia in 2002 after a final appeal to the Australian High Court was rejected on procedural grounds in the Leesa Meldrum case. A Victorian federal court had ruled in 2000 that the existing ban on all single women and lesbians using IVF constituted sex discrimination. Victoria's government announced changes to its IVF law in 2007 eliminating remaining restrictions on fertile single women and lesbians, leaving South Australia as the only state maintaining them.\n\nFederal regulations in the United States include screening requirements and restrictions on donations, but generally do not affect sexually intimate partners. However, doctors may be required to \"provide\" treatments due to nondiscrimination laws, as for example in California. The US state of Tennessee proposed a bill in 2009 that would have defined donor IVF as adoption. During the same session another bill proposed barring adoption from any unmarried and cohabitating couple, and activist groups stated that passing the first bill would effectively stop unmarried people from using IVF. Neither of these bills passed.\n\n\n\n", "id": "57880", "title": "In vitro fertilisation"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21304415", "text": "Sexual reproduction\n\nSexual reproduction is a form of reproduction where two morphologically distinct types of specialized reproductive cells called gametes fuse together, involving a female's large ovum (or egg) and a male's smaller sperm. Each gamete contains half the number of chromosomes of normal cells. They are created by a specialized type of cell division, which only occurs in eukaryotic cells, known as meiosis. The two gametes fuse during fertilization to produce DNA replication and the creation of a single-celled zygote which includes genetic material from both gametes. In a process called genetic recombination, genetic material (DNA) joins up so that homologous chromosome sequences are aligned with each other, and this is followed by exchange of genetic information. Two rounds of cell division then produce four daughter cells with half the number of chromosomes from each original parent cell, and the same number of chromosomes as both parents, though self-fertilization can occur. For instance, in human reproduction each human cell contains 46 chromosomes, 23 pairs, except gamete cells, which only contain 23 chromosomes, so the child will have 23 chromosomes from each parent genetically recombined into 23 pairs. Cell division initiates the development of a new individual organism in multicellular organisms, including animals and plants, for the vast majority of whom this is the primary method of reproduction.\n\nThe evolution of sexual reproduction is a major puzzle because asexual reproduction should be able to outcompete it as every young organism created can bear its own young. This implies that an asexual population has an intrinsic capacity to grow more rapidly with each generation. This 50% cost is a fitness disadvantage of sexual reproduction. The two-fold cost of sex includes this cost and the fact that any organism can only pass on 50% of its own genes to its offspring. One definite advantage of sexual reproduction is that it prevents the accumulation of genetic mutations.\n\nSexual selection is a mode of natural selection in which some individuals out-reproduce others of a population because they are better at securing mates for sexual reproduction. It has been described as \"a powerful evolutionary force that does not exist in asexual populations.\"\n\nProkaryotes, whose initial cell has additional or transformed genetic material, reproduce through asexual reproduction but may, in lateral gene transfer, display processes such as bacterial conjugation, transformation and transduction, which are similar to sexual reproduction although they do not lead to reproduction.\n\nThe first fossilized evidence of sexual reproduction in eukaryotes is from the Stenian period, about 1 to 1.2 billion years ago.\n\nBiologists studying evolution propose several explanations for why sexual reproduction developed and why it is maintained. These reasons include reducing the likelihood of the accumulation of deleterious mutations, increasing rate of adaptation to changing environments, dealing with competition, and masking deleterious mutations. All of these ideas about why sexual reproduction has been maintained are generally supported, but ultimately the size of the population determines if sexual reproduction is entirely beneficial. Larger populations appear to respond more quickly to benefits obtained through sexual reproduction than do smaller population sizes.\n\nMaintenance of sexual reproduction has been explained by theories that work at several levels of selection, though some of these models remain controversial. However, newer models presented in recent years suggest a basic advantage for sexual reproduction in slowly reproducing complex organisms.\n\nSexual reproduction allows these species to exhibit characteristics that depend on the specific environment that they inhabit, and the particular survival strategies that they employ.\n\nIn order to sexually reproduce, both males and females need to find a mate. Generally in animals mate choice is made by females while males compete to be chosen. This can lead organisms to extreme efforts in order to reproduce, such as combat and display, or produce extreme features caused by a positive feedback known as a Fisherian runaway. Thus sexual reproduction, as a form of natural selection, has an effect on evolution. Sexual dimorphism is where the basic phenotypic traits vary between males and females of the same species. Dimorphism is found in both sex organs and in secondary sex characteristics, body size, physical strength and morphology, biological ornamentation, behavior and other bodily traits. However, sexual selection is only implied over an extended period of time leading to sexual dimorphism.\n\nApart from some eusocial wasps, organisms which reproduce sexually have a 1:1 sex ratio of male and female births. The English statistician and biologist Ronald Fisher outlined why this is so in what has come to be known as Fisher's principle. This essentially says the following:\n\nInsect species make up more than two-thirds of all extant animal species. Most insect species reproduce sexually, though some species are facultatively parthenogenetic. Many insects species have sexual dimorphism, while in others the sexes look nearly identical. Typically they have two sexes with males producing spermatozoa and females ova. The ova develop into eggs that have a covering called the chorion, which forms before internal fertilization. Insects have very diverse mating and reproductive strategies most often resulting in the male depositing spermatophore within the female, which she stores until she is ready for egg fertilization. After fertilization, and the formation of a zygote, and varying degrees of development, in many species the eggs are deposited outside the female; while in others, they develop further within the female and are born live.\n\nThere are three extant kinds of mammals: monotremes, placentals and marsupials, all with internal fertilization. In placental mammals, offspring are born as juveniles: complete animals with the sex organs present although not reproductively functional. After several months or years, depending on the species, the sex organs develop further to maturity and the animal becomes sexually mature. Most female mammals are only fertile during certain periods during their estrous cycle, at which point they are ready to mate. Individual male and female mammals meet and carry out copulation. For most mammals, males and females exchange sexual partners throughout their adult lives.\n\nThe vast majority of fish species lay eggs that are then fertilized by the male, some species lay their eggs on a substrate like a rock or on plants, while others scatter their eggs and the eggs are fertilized as they drift or sink in the water column.\n\nSome fish species use internal fertilization and then disperse the developing eggs or give birth to live offspring. Fish that have live-bearing offspring include the guppy and mollies or \"Poecilia\". Fishes that give birth to live young can be ovoviviparous, where the eggs are fertilized within the female and the eggs simply hatch within the female body, or in seahorses, the male carries the developing young within a pouch, and gives birth to live young. Fishes can also be viviparous, where the female supplies nourishment to the internally growing offspring. Some fish are hermaphrodites, where a single fish is both male and female and can produce eggs and sperm. In hermaphroditic fish, some are male and female at the same time while in other fish they are serially hermaphroditic; starting as one sex and changing to the other. In at least one hermaphroditic species, self-fertilization occurs when the eggs and sperm are released together. Internal self-fertilization may occur in some other species. One fish species does not reproduce by sexual reproduction but uses sex to produce offspring; \"Poecilia formosa\" is a unisex species that uses a form of parthenogenesis called gynogenesis, where unfertilized eggs develop into embryos that produce female offspring. \"Poecilia formosa\" mate with males of other fish species that use internal fertilization, the sperm does not fertilize the eggs but stimulates the growth of the eggs which develops into embryos.\n\nAnimals typically produce gametes directly by meiosis. Male gametes are called sperm, and female gametes are called eggs or ova. In animals, fertilization follows immediately after meiosis. Plants on the other hand have mitosis occurring in spores, which are produced by meiosis. The spores germinate into the gametophyte phase. The gametophytes of different groups of plants vary in size; angiosperms have as few as three cells in pollen, and mosses and other so called primitive plants may have several million cells. Plants have an alternation of generations where the sporophyte phase is succeeded by the gametophyte phase. The sporophyte phase produces spores within the sporangium by meiosis.\n\nFlowering plants are the dominant plant form on land and they reproduce either sexually or asexually. Often their most distinguishing feature is their reproductive organs, commonly called flowers. The anther produces pollen grains which contain the male gametophytes (sperm). For pollination to occur, pollen grains must attach to the stigma of the female reproductive structure (carpel), where the female gametophytes (ovules) are located inside the ovary. After the pollen tube grows through the carpel's style, the sex cell nuclei from the pollen grain migrate into the ovule to fertilize the egg cell and endosperm nuclei within the female gametophyte in a process termed double fertilization. The resulting zygote develops into an embryo, while the triploid endosperm (one sperm cell plus two female cells) and female tissues of the ovule give rise to the surrounding tissues in the developing seed. The ovary, which produced the female gametophyte(s), then grows into a fruit, which surrounds the seed(s). Plants may either self-pollinate or cross-pollinate.\n\nNonflowering plants like ferns, moss and liverworts use other means of sexual reproduction.\n\nIn 2013, flowers dating from the Cretaceous (100 million years before present) were found encased in amber, the oldest evidence of sexual reproduction in a flowering plant. Microscopic images showed tubes growing out of pollen and penetrating the flower's stigma. The pollen was sticky, suggesting it was carried by insects.\n\nFerns mostly produce large diploid sporophytes with rhizomes, roots and leaves; and on fertile leaves called sporangium, spores are produced. The spores are released and germinate to produce short, thin gametophytes that are typically heart shaped, small and green in color. The gametophytes or thallus, produce both motile sperm in the antheridia and egg cells in separate archegonia. After rains or when dew deposits a film of water, the motile sperm are splashed away from the antheridia, which are normally produced on the top side of the thallus, and swim in the film of water to the archegonia where they fertilize the egg. To promote out crossing or cross fertilization the sperm are released before the eggs are receptive of the sperm, making it more likely that the sperm will fertilize the eggs of different thallus. A zygote is formed after fertilization, which grows into a new sporophytic plant. The condition of having separate sporephyte and gametophyte plants is called alternation of generations. Other plants with similar reproductive means include the \"Psilotum\", \"Lycopodium\", \"Selaginella\" and \"Equisetum\".\n\nThe bryophytes, which include liverworts, hornworts and mosses, reproduce both sexually and vegetatively. They are small plants found growing in moist locations and like ferns, have motile sperm with flagella and need water to facilitate sexual reproduction. These plants start as a haploid spore that grows into the dominate form, which is a multicellular haploid body with leaf-like structures that photosynthesize. Haploid gametes are produced in antherida and archegonia by mitosis. The sperm released from the antherida respond to chemicals released by ripe archegonia and swim to them in a film of water and fertilize the egg cells thus producing a zygote. The zygote divides by mitotic division and grows into a sporophyte that is diploid. The multicellular diploid sporophyte produces structures called spore capsules, which are connected by seta to the archegonia. The spore capsules produce spores by meiosis, when ripe the capsules burst open and the spores are released. Bryophytes show considerable variation in their breeding structures and the above is a basic outline. Also in some species each plant is one sex while other species produce both sexes on the same plant.\n\nFungi are classified by the methods of sexual reproduction they employ. The outcome of sexual reproduction most often is the production of resting spores that are used to survive inclement times and to spread. There are typically three phases in the sexual reproduction of fungi: plasmogamy, karyogamy and meiosis. The cytoplasm of two parent cells fuse during plasmogamy and the nuclei fuse during karyogamy. New haploid gametes are formed during meiosis and develop into spores.\n\nThree distinct processes in prokaryotes are regarded as similar to eukaryotic sex: bacterial transformation, which involves the incorporation of foreign DNA into the bacterial chromosome; bacterial conjugation, which is a transfer of plasmid DNA between bacteria, but the plasmids are rarely incorporated into the bacterial chromosome; and gene transfer and genetic exchange in archaea.\n\nBacterial transformation involves the recombination of genetic material and its function is mainly associated with DNA repair. Bacterial transformation is a complex process encoded by numerous bacterial genes, and is a bacterial adaptation for DNA transfer. This process occurs naturally in at least 40 bacterial species. For a bacterium to bind, take up, and recombine exogenous DNA into its chromosome, it must enter a special physiological state referred to as competence (see Natural competence). Sexual reproduction in early single-celled eukaryotes may have evolved from bacterial transformation, or from a similar process in archaea (see below).\n\nOn the other hand, bacterial conjugation is a type of direct transfer of DNA between two bacteria through an external appendage called the conjugation pilus. Bacterial conjugation is controlled by plasmid genes that are adapted for spreading copies of the plasmid between bacteria. The infrequent integration of a plasmid into a host bacterial chromosome, and the subsequent transfer of a part of the host chromosome to another cell do not appear to be bacterial adaptations.\n\nExposure of hyperthermophilic archaeal Sulfolobus species to DNA damaging conditions induces cellular aggregation accompanied by high frequency genetic marker exchange. Ajon et al. hypothesized that this cellular aggregation enhances species-specific DNA repair by homologous recombination. DNA transfer in Sulfolobus may be an early form of sexual interaction similar to the more well-studied bacterial transformation systems that also involve species-specific DNA transfer leading to homologous recombinational repair of DNA damage.\n\n\n", "id": "21304415", "title": "Sexual reproduction"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1600053", "text": "Self-replicating machine\n\nA self-replicating machine is a type of autonomous robot that is capable of reproducing itself autonomously using raw materials found in the environment, thus exhibiting self-replication in a way analogous to that found in nature. The concept of self-replicating machines has been advanced and examined by Homer Jacobsen, Edward F. Moore, Freeman Dyson, John von Neumann and in more recent times by K. Eric Drexler in his book on nanotechnology, \"Engines of Creation\" (coining the term clanking replicator for such machines) and by Robert Freitas and Ralph Merkle in their review \"Kinematic Self-Replicating Machines\" which provided the first comprehensive analysis of the entire replicator design space. The future development of such technology is an integral part of several plans involving the mining of moons and asteroid belts for ore and other materials, the creation of lunar factories, and even the construction of solar power satellites in space. The possibly misnamed von Neumann probe is one theoretical example of such a machine. Von Neumann also worked on what he called the universal constructor, a self-replicating machine that would operate in a cellular automata environment.\n\nA self-replicating machine is an artificial self-replicating system that relies on conventional large-scale technology and automation. Certain idiosyncratic terms are occasionally found in the literature. For example, the term clanking replicator was once used by Drexler to distinguish macroscale replicating systems from the microscopic nanorobots or \"assemblers\" that nanotechnology may make possible, but the term is informal and is rarely used by others in popular or technical discussions. Replicators have also been called \"von Neumann machines\" after John von Neumann, who first rigorously studied the idea. However, the term \"von Neumann machine\" is less specific and also refers to a completely unrelated computer architecture that von Neumann proposed and so its use is discouraged where accuracy is important. Von Neumann himself used the term universal constructor to describe such self-replicating machines.\n\nHistorians of machine tools, even before the numerical control era, sometimes figuratively said that machine tools were a unique class of machines because they have the ability to \"reproduce themselves\" by copying all of their parts. Implicit in these discussions is that a human would direct the cutting processes (later planning and programming the machines), and would then be assembling the parts. The same is true for RepRaps, which are another class of machines sometimes mentioned in reference to such non-autonomous \"self-replication\". In contrast, machines that are \"truly autonomously\" self-replicating (like biological machines) are the main subject discussed here.\n\nThe general concept of artificial machines capable of producing copies of themselves dates back at least several hundred years. An early reference is an anecdote regarding the philosopher René Descartes, who suggested to Queen Christina of Sweden that the human body could be regarded as a machine; she responded by pointing to a clock and ordering \"see to it that it reproduces offspring.\" Several other variations on this anecdotal response also exist. Samuel Butler proposed in his 1872 novel \"Erewhon\" that machines were already capable of reproducing themselves but it was man who made them do so, and added that \"\"machines which reproduce machinery do not reproduce machines after their own kind\"\". In George Eliot's 1879 book \"Impressions of Theophrastus Such\", a series of essays that she wrote in the character of a fictional scholar named Theophrastus, the essay \"Shadows of the Coming Race\" speculated about self-replicating machines, with Theophrastus asking \"how do I know that they may not be ultimately made to carry, or may not in themselves evolve, conditions of self-supply, self-repair, and reproduction\".\n\nIn 1802 William Paley formulated the first known teleological argument depicting machines producing other machines, suggesting that the question of who originally made a watch was rendered moot if it were demonstrated that the watch was able to manufacture a copy of itself. Scientific study of self-reproducing machines was anticipated by John Bernal as early as 1929 and by mathematicians such as Stephen Kleene who began developing recursion theory in the 1930s. Much of this latter work was motivated by interest in information processing and algorithms rather than physical implementation of such a system, however.\n\nA detailed conceptual proposal for a physical non-biological self-replicating system was first put forward by mathematician John von Neumann in lectures delivered in 1948 and 1949, when he proposed a kinematic self-reproducing automaton model as a thought experiment. Von Neumann's concept of a physical self-replicating machine was dealt with only abstractly, with the hypothetical machine using a \"sea\" or stockroom of spare parts as its source of raw materials. The machine had a program stored on a memory tape that directed it to retrieve parts from this \"sea\" using a manipulator, assemble them into a duplicate of itself, and then copy the contents of its memory tape into the empty duplicate's. The machine was envisioned as consisting of as few as eight different types of components; four logic elements that send and receive stimuli and four mechanical elements used to provide a structural skeleton and mobility. While qualitatively sound, von Neumann was evidently dissatisfied with this model of a self-replicating machine due to the difficulty of analyzing it with mathematical rigor. He went on to instead develop an even more abstract model self-replicator based on cellular automata. His original kinematic concept remained obscure until it was popularized in a 1955 issue of \"Scientific American\".\n\nIn 1956 mathematician Edward F. Moore proposed the first known suggestion for a practical real-world self-replicating machine, also published in \"Scientific American\". Moore's \"artificial living plants\" were proposed as machines able to use air, water and soil as sources of raw materials and to draw its energy from sunlight via a solar battery or a steam engine. He chose the seashore as an initial habitat for such machines, giving them easy access to the chemicals in seawater, and suggested that later generations of the machine could be designed to float freely on the ocean's surface as self-replicating factory barges or to be placed in barren desert terrain that was otherwise useless for industrial purposes. The self-replicators would be \"harvested\" for their component parts, to be used by humanity in other non-replicating machines.\n\nThe next major development of the concept of self-replicating machines was a series of thought experiments proposed by physicist Freeman Dyson in his 1970 Vanuxem Lecture. He proposed three large-scale applications of machine replicators. First was to send a self-replicating system to Saturn's moon Enceladus, which in addition to producing copies of itself would also be programmed to manufacture and launch solar sail-propelled cargo spacecraft. These spacecraft would carry blocks of Enceladean ice to Mars, where they would be used to terraform the planet. His second proposal was a solar-powered factory system designed for a terrestrial desert environment, and his third was an \"industrial development kit\" based on this replicator that could be sold to developing countries to provide them with as much industrial capacity as desired. When Dyson revised and reprinted his lecture in 1979 he added proposals for a modified version of Moore's seagoing artificial living plants that was designed to distill and store fresh water for human use and the \"Astrochicken.\"\n\nIn 1980, inspired by a 1979 \"New Directions Workshop\" held at Wood's Hole, NASA conducted a joint summer study with ASEE entitled to produce a detailed proposal for self-replicating factories to develop lunar resources without requiring additional launches or human workers on-site. The study was conducted at Santa Clara University and ran from June 23 to August 29, with the final report published in 1982. The proposed system would have been capable of exponentially increasing productive capacity and the design could be modified to build self-replicating probes to explore the galaxy.\n\nThe reference design included small computer-controlled electric carts running on rails inside the factory, mobile \"paving machines\" that used large parabolic mirrors to focus sunlight on lunar regolith to melt and sinter it into a hard surface suitable for building on, and robotic front-end loaders for strip mining. Raw lunar regolith would be refined by a variety of techniques, primarily hydrofluoric acid leaching. Large transports with a variety of manipulator arms and tools were proposed as the constructors that would put together new factories from parts and assemblies produced by its parent.\n\nPower would be provided by a \"canopy\" of solar cells supported on pillars. The other machinery would be placed under the canopy.\n\nA \"casting robot\" would use sculpting tools and templates to make plaster molds. Plaster was selected because the molds are easy to make, can make precise parts with good surface finishes, and the plaster can be easily recycled afterward using an oven to bake the water back out. The robot would then cast most of the parts either from nonconductive molten rock (basalt) or purified metals. A carbon dioxide laser cutting and welding system was also included.\n\nA more speculative, more complex microchip fabricator was specified to produce the computer and electronic systems, but the designers also said that it might prove practical to ship the chips from Earth as if they were \"vitamins.\"\n\nA 2004 study supported by NASA's Institute for Advanced Concepts took this idea further. Some experts are beginning to consider self-replicating machines for asteroid mining.\n\nMuch of the design study was concerned with a simple, flexible chemical system for processing the ores, and the differences between the ratio of elements needed by the replicator, and the ratios available in lunar regolith. The element that most limited the growth rate was chlorine, needed to process regolith for aluminium. Chlorine is very rare in lunar regolith.\n\nIn 1995, inspired by Dyson's 1970 suggestion of seeding uninhabited deserts on Earth with self-replicating machines for industrial development, Klaus Lackner and Christopher Wendt developed a more detailed outline for such a system. They proposed a colony of cooperating mobile robots 10–30 cm in size running on a grid of electrified ceramic tracks around stationary manufacturing equipment and fields of solar cells. Their proposal didn't include a complete analysis of the system's material requirements, but described a novel method for extracting the ten most common chemical elements found in raw desert topsoil (Na, Fe, Mg, Si, Ca, Ti, Al, C, O and H) using a high-temperature carbothermic process. This proposal was popularized in Discover Magazine, featuring solar-powered desalination equipment used to irrigate the desert in which the system was based. They named their machines \"Auxons\", from the Greek word \"auxein\" which means \"to grow.\"\n\nEarly experimentation with rapid prototyping in 1997-2000 was not expressly oriented toward reproducing rapid prototyping systems themselves, but rather extended simulated \"evolutionary robotics\" techniques into the physical world. Later developments in rapid prototyping have given the process the ability to produce a wide variety of electronic and mechanical components, making this a rapidly developing frontier in self-replicating system research.\n\nIn 1998 Chris Phoenix informally outlined a design for a hydraulically powered replicator a few cubic feet in volume that used ultraviolet light to cure soft plastic feedstock and a fluidic logic control system, but didn't address most of the details of assembly procedures, error rates, or machining tolerances.\n\nIn 2005, Adrian Bowyer of the University of Bath started the RepRap Project to develop a rapid prototyping machine which would be able to manufacture some or most of its own components, making such machines cheap enough for people to buy and use in their homes. The project is releasing its designs and control programs under the GNU GPL. The RepRap approach uses fused deposition modeling to manufacture plastic components, possibly incorporating conductive pathways for circuitry. Other components, such as steel rods, nuts and bolts, motors and separate electronic components, would be supplied externally. In 2006 the project produced a basic functional prototype and in May 2008 the machine succeeded in producing all of the plastic parts required to make a 'child' machine.\n\nSome researchers have proposed a microfactory of specialized machines that support recursion—nearly all of the parts of all of the machines in the factory can be manufactured by the factory.\n\nIn the spirit of the 1980 \"Advanced Automation for Space Missions\" study, the NASA Institute for Advanced Concepts began several studies of self-replicating system design in 2002 and 2003. Four phase I grants were awarded:\n\n\nIn 2012, NASA researchers Metzger, Muscatello, Mueller, and Mantovani argued for a bootstrapping approach to start self-replicating factories in space. They developed this concept on the basis of In Situ Resource Utilization (ISRU) technologies that NASA has been developing to \"live off the land\" on the Moon or Mars. Their modeling showed that in just 20 to 40 years this industry could become self-sufficient then grow to large size, enabling greater exploration in space as well as providing benefits back to Earth. In 2014, Thomas Kalil of the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy published on the White House blog an interview with Metzger on bootstrapping solar system civilization through self-replicating space industry. Kalil requested the public submit ideas for how \"the Administration, the private sector, philanthropists, the research community, and storytellers can further these goals.\" Kalil connected this concept to what former NASA Chief technologist Mason Peck has dubbed \"Massless Exploration\", the ability to make everything in space so that you do not need to launch it from Earth. Peck has said, \"...all the mass we need to explore the solar system is already in space. It's just in the wrong shape.\" In 2016, Metzger argued that fully self-replicating industry can be started over several decades by astronauts at a lunar outpost for a total cost (outpost plus starting the industry) of about a third of the space budgets of the International Space Station partner nations, and that this industry would solve Earth's energy and environmental problems in addition to providing massless exploration.\n\nIn 2005, a team of researchers at Cornell University, including Hod Lipson, implemented a self-assembling machine. The machine is composed of a tower of four articulated cubes, known as \"molecubes\", which can revolve about a triagonal. This enables the tower to function as a robotic arm, collecting nearby molecubes and assembling them into a copy of itself. The arm is directed by a computer program, which is contained within each molecube, analogous to how each animal cell contains an entire copy of its DNA. However, the machine cannot manufacture individual molecubes, nor do they occur naturally, so its status as a self-replicator is debatable.\n\nIn 2011, a team of scientists at New York University created a structure called 'BTX' (bent triple helix) based around three double helix molecules, each made from a short strand of DNA. Treating each group of three double-helices as a code letter, they can (in principle) build up self-replicating structures that encode large quantities of information.\n\nIn 2001 Jarle Breivik at University of Oslo created a system of magnetic building blocks, which in response to temperature fluctuations, spontaneously form self-replicating polymers.\n\nIn 1968 Zellig Harris wrote that \"the metalanguage is in the language,\" suggesting that self-replication is part of language. In 1977 Niklaus Wirth formalized this proposition by publishing a self-replicating deterministic context-free grammar. Adding to it probabilities, Bertrand du Castel published in 2015 a self-replicating stochastic grammar and presented a mapping of that grammar to neural networks, thereby presenting a model for a self-replicating neural circuit.\n\nPartial construction is the concept that the constructor creates a partially constructed (rather than fully formed) offspring, which is then left to complete its own construction.\n\nThe von Neumann model of self-replication envisages that the mother automaton should construct all portions of daughter automatons, without exception and prior to the initiation of such daughters. Partial construction alters the construction relationship between mother and daughter automatons, such that the mother constructs but a portion of the daughter, and upon initiating this portion of the daughter, thereafter retracts from imparting further influence upon the daughter. Instead, the daughter automaton is left to complete its own development. This is to say, means exist by which automatons may develop via the mechanism of a zygote.\n\nThe idea of an automated spacecraft capable of constructing copies of itself was first proposed in scientific literature in 1974 by Michael A. Arbib, but the concept had appeared earlier in science fiction such as the 1967 novel \"Berserker\" by Fred Saberhagen or the 1950 novellette trilogy \"The Voyage of the Space Beagle\" by A. E. van Vogt. The first quantitative engineering analysis of a self-replicating spacecraft was published in 1980 by Robert Freitas, in which the non-replicating Project Daedalus design was modified to include all subsystems necessary for self-replication. The design's strategy was to use the probe to deliver a \"seed\" factory with a mass of about 443 tons to a distant site, have the seed factory replicate many copies of itself there to increase its total manufacturing capacity, and then use the resulting automated industrial complex to construct more probes with a single seed factory on board each.\n\n\nAs the use of industrial automation has expanded over time, some factories have begun to approach a semblance of self-sufficiency that is suggestive of self-replicating machines. However, such factories are unlikely to achieve \"full closure\" until the cost and flexibility of automated machinery comes close to that of human labour and the manufacture of spare parts and other components locally becomes more economical than transporting them from elsewhere. As Samuel Butler has pointed out in Erewhon, replication of partially closed universal machine tool factories is already possible. Since safety is a primary goal of all legislative consideration of regulation of such development, future development efforts may be limited to systems which lack either control, matter, or energy closure. Fully capable machine replicators are most useful for developing resources in dangerous environments which are not easily reached by existing transportation systems (such as outer space).\n\nAn artificial replicator can be considered to be a form of artificial life. Depending on its design, it might be subject to evolution over an extended period of time. However, with robust error correction, and the possibility of external intervention, the common science fiction scenario of robotic life run amok will remain extremely unlikely for the foreseeable future.\n\n\nThe power source might be solar or possibly radioisotope based given that new liquid based compounds can generate substantial power from radioactive decay.\n\n", "id": "1600053", "title": "Self-replicating machine"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13013807", "text": "Selfing\n\nSelfing or self-fertilization is the union of male and female gametes and/or nuclei from same haploid, diploid, or polyploid organism. It is an extreme degree of inbreeding.\n\nSelfing is widespread – from unicellular organisms to the most complex hermaphroditic plants and animals (especially invertebrates). In unicellular organisms such as Protozoa, selfing can occur when two individuals (or their cell nuclei) interbreed that were produced from a previous mitotic division of the same individual.\n\nAmong hermaphrodite animals there are some that regularly reproduce by self-fertilization. In others, it is a rare event; selfing in such species is more common in adverse environmental conditions, or in the absence of a partner.\n\nSelf-fertilization results in the loss of genetic variation within an individual (offspring), because many of the genetic loci that were heterozygous become homozygous. This can result in the expression of harmful recessive alleles, which can have serious consequences for the individual. The effects are most extreme when self-fertilization occurs in organisms that are usually out-crossing. After several generations, inbreeding depression is likely to purge the deleterious alleles from the population because the individuals carrying them have mostly died or failed to reproduce.\n\nIf no other effects interfere, the proportion of heterozygous loci is halved in each successive generation, as shown in the following table.\n\n\nIllustration model of the decrease in genetic variation in a population of self-fertilized organisms derived from a heterozygous individual, assuming equal fitness\n\n", "id": "13013807", "title": "Selfing"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26310", "text": "Reproduction\n\nReproduction (or procreation or breeding) is the biological process by which new individual organisms – \"offspring\" – are produced from their \"parents\". Reproduction is a fundamental feature of all known life; each individual organism exists as the result of reproduction. There are two forms of reproduction: asexual and sexual.\n\nIn asexual reproduction, an organism can reproduce without the involvement of another organism. Asexual reproduction is not limited to single-celled organisms. The cloning of an organism is a form of asexual reproduction. By asexual reproduction, an organism creates a genetically similar or identical copy of itself. The evolution of sexual reproduction is a major puzzle for biologists. The two-fold cost of sexual reproduction is that only 50% of organisms reproduce and organisms only pass on 50% of their genes.\n\nSexual reproduction typically requires the sexual interaction of two specialized organisms, called gametes, which contain half the number of chromosomes of normal cells and are created by meiosis, with typically a male fertilizing a female of the same species to create a fertilized zygote. This produces offspring organisms whose genetic characteristics are derived from those of the two parental organisms.\n\nAsexual reproduction is a process by which organisms create genetically similar or identical copies of themselves without the contribution of genetic material from another organism. Bacteria divide asexually via binary fission; viruses take control of host cells to produce more viruses; Hydras (invertebrates of the order \"Hydroidea\") and yeasts are able to reproduce by budding. These organisms often do not possess different sexes, and they are capable of \"splitting\" themselves into two or more copies of themselves. Most plants have the ability to reproduce asexually and the ant species Mycocepurus smithii is thought to reproduce entirely by asexual means.\n\nSome species that are capable of reproducing asexually, like hydra, yeast (See Mating of yeasts) and jellyfish, may also reproduce sexually. For instance, most plants are capable of vegetative reproduction—reproduction without seeds or spores—but can also reproduce sexually. Likewise, bacteria may exchange genetic information by conjugation.\n\nOther ways of asexual reproduction include parthenogenesis, fragmentation and spore formation that involves only mitosis. Parthenogenesis is the growth and development of embryo or seed without fertilization by a male. Parthenogenesis occurs naturally in some species, including lower plants (where it is called apomixis), invertebrates (e.g. water fleas, aphids, some bees and parasitic wasps), and vertebrates (e.g. some\nreptiles, fish, and, very rarely, birds and sharks). It is sometimes also used to describe reproduction modes in hermaphroditic species which can self-fertilize.\n\nSexual reproduction is a biological process that creates a new organism by combining the genetic material of two organisms in a process that starts with meiosis, a specialized type of cell division. Each of two parent organisms contributes half of the offspring's genetic makeup by creating haploid gametes. Most organisms form two different types of gametes. In these anisogamous species, the two sexes are referred to as male (producing sperm or microspores) and female (producing ova or megaspores). In isogamous species, the gametes are similar or identical in form (isogametes), but may have separable properties and then may be given other different names (see isogamy). For example, in the green alga, \"Chlamydomonas reinhardtii\", there are so-called \"plus\" and \"minus\" gametes. A few types of organisms, such as many fungi and the ciliate \"Paramecium aurelia\", have more than two \"sexes\", called syngens.\nMost animals (including humans) and plants reproduce sexually. Sexually reproducing organisms have different sets of genes for every trait (called alleles). Offspring inherit one allele for each trait from each parent. Thus, offspring have a combination of the parents' genes. It is believed that \"the masking of deleterious alleles favors the evolution of a dominant diploid phase in organisms that alternate between haploid and diploid phases\" where recombination occurs freely.\n\nBryophytes reproduce sexually, but the larger and commonly-seen organisms are haploid and produce gametes. The gametes fuse to form a zygote which develops into a sporangium, which in turn produces haploid spores. The diploid stage is relatively small and short-lived compared to the haploid stage, i.e. \"haploid dominance\". The advantage of diploidy, heterosis, only exists in the diploid life generation. Bryophytes retain sexual reproduction despite the fact that the haploid stage does not benefit from heterosis. This may be an indication that the sexual reproduction has advantages other than heterosis, such as genetic recombination between members of the species, allowing the expression of a wider range of traits and thus making the population more able to survive environmental variation.\n\nAllogamy is the fertilization of the combination of gametes from two parents, generally the ovum from one individual with the spermatozoa of another. (In isogamous species, the two gametes will not be defined as either sperm or ovum.)\n\nSelf-fertilization, also known as autogamy, occurs in hermaphroditic organisms where the two gametes fused in fertilization come from the same individual, e.g., many vascular plants, some foraminiferans, some ciliates. The term \"autogamy\" is sometimes substituted for autogamous pollination (not necessarily leading to successful fertilization) and describes self-pollination within the same flower, distinguished from geitonogamous pollination, transfer of pollen to a different flower on the same flowering plant, or within a single monoecious Gymnosperm plant.\n\nMitosis and meiosis are types of cell division. Mitosis occurs in somatic cells, while meiosis occurs in gametes.\n\nMitosis\nThe resultant number of cells in mitosis is twice the number of original cells. The number of chromosomes in the offspring cells is the same as that of the parent cell.\n\nMeiosis\nThe resultant number of cells is four times the number of original cells. This results in cells with half the number of chromosomes present in the parent cell. A diploid cell duplicates itself, then undergoes two divisions (tetraploid to diploid to haploid), in the process forming four haploid cells. This process occurs in two phases, meiosis I and meiosis II.\nIn recent decades, developmental biologists have been researching and developing techniques to facilitate same-sex reproduction. The obvious approaches, subject to a growing amount of activity, are female sperm and male eggs, with female sperm closer to being a reality for humans, given that Japanese scientists have already created female sperm for chickens. \"However, the ratio of produced W chromosome-bearing (W-bearing) spermatozoa fell substantially below expectations. It is therefore concluded that most of the W-bearing PGC could not differentiate into spermatozoa because of restricted spermatogenesis.\" In 2004, by altering the function of a few genes involved with imprinting, other Japanese scientists combined two mouse eggs to produce daughter mice.\n\nThere are a wide range of reproductive strategies employed by different species. Some animals, such as the human and northern gannet, do not reach sexual maturity for many years after birth and even then produce few offspring. Others reproduce quickly; but, under normal circumstances, most offspring do not survive to adulthood. For example, a rabbit (mature after 8 months) can produce 10–30 offspring per year, and a fruit fly (mature after 10–14 days) can produce up to 900 offspring per year. These two main strategies are known as K-selection (few offspring) and r-selection (many offspring). Which strategy is favoured by evolution depends on a variety of circumstances. Animals with few offspring can devote more resources to the nurturing and protection of each individual offspring, thus reducing the need for many offspring. On the other hand, animals with many offspring may devote fewer resources to each individual offspring; for these types of animals it is common for many offspring to die soon after birth, but enough individuals typically survive to maintain the population. Some organisms such as honey bees and fruit flies retain sperm in a process called sperm storage thereby increasing the duration of their fertility.\n\n\nOrganisms that reproduce through asexual reproduction tend to grow in number exponentially. However, because they rely on mutation for variations in their DNA, all members of the species have similar vulnerabilities. Organisms that reproduce sexually yield a smaller number of offspring, but the large amount of variation in their genes makes them less susceptible to disease.\n\nMany organisms can reproduce sexually as well as asexually. Aphids, slime molds, sea anemones, some species of starfish (by fragmentation), and many plants are examples. When environmental factors are favorable, asexual reproduction is employed to exploit suitable conditions for survival such as an abundant food supply, adequate shelter, favorable climate, disease, optimum pH or a proper mix of other lifestyle requirements. Populations of these organisms increase exponentially via asexual reproductive strategies to take full advantage of the rich supply resources.\n\nWhen food sources have been depleted, the climate becomes hostile, or individual survival is jeopardized by some other adverse change in living conditions, these organisms switch to sexual forms of reproduction. Sexual reproduction ensures a mixing of the gene pool of the species. The variations found in offspring of sexual reproduction allow some individuals to be better suited for survival and provide a mechanism for selective adaptation to occur. The meiosis stage of the sexual cycle also allows especially effective repair of DNA damages (see Meiosis and Bernstein et al.). In addition, sexual reproduction usually results in the formation of a life stage that is able to endure the conditions that threaten the offspring of an asexual parent. Thus, seeds, spores, eggs, pupae, cysts or other \"over-wintering\" stages of sexual reproduction ensure the survival during unfavorable times and the organism can \"wait out\" adverse situations until a swing back to suitability occurs.\n\nThe existence of life without reproduction is the subject of some speculation. The biological study of how the origin of life produced reproducing organisms from non-reproducing elements is called abiogenesis. Whether or not there were several independent abiogenetic events, biologists believe that the last universal ancestor to all present life on Earth lived about 3.5 billion years ago.\n\nScientists have speculated about the possibility of creating life non-reproductively in the laboratory. Several scientists have succeeded in producing simple viruses from entirely non-living materials. However, viruses are often regarded as not alive. Being nothing more than a bit of RNA or DNA in a protein capsule, they have no metabolism and can only replicate with the assistance of a hijacked cell's metabolic machinery.\n\nThe production of a truly living organism (e.g. a simple bacterium) with no ancestors would be a much more complex task, but may well be possible to some degree according to current biological knowledge. A synthetic genome has been transferred into an existing bacterium where it replaced the native DNA, resulting in the artificial production of a new \"M. mycoides\" organism.\n\nThere is some debate within the scientific community over whether this cell can be considered completely synthetic on the grounds that the chemically synthesized genome was an almost 1:1 copy of a naturally occurring genome and, the recipient cell was a naturally occurring bacterium. The Craig Venter Institute maintains the term \"synthetic bacterial cell\" but they also clarify \"...we do not consider this to be \"creating life from scratch\" but rather we are creating new life out of already existing life using synthetic DNA\". Venter plans to patent his experimental cells, stating that \"they are pretty clearly human inventions\". Its creators suggests that building 'synthetic life' would allow researchers to learn about life by building it, rather than by tearing it apart. They also propose to stretch the boundaries between life and machines until the two overlap to yield \"truly programmable organisms\". Researchers involved stated that the creation of \"true synthetic biochemical life\" is relatively close in reach with current technology and cheap compared to the effort needed to place man on the Moon.\n\nSexual reproduction has many drawbacks, since it requires far more energy than asexual reproduction and diverts the organisms from other pursuits, and there is some argument about why so many species use it. George C. Williams used lottery tickets as an analogy in one explanation for the widespread use of sexual reproduction. He argued that asexual reproduction, which produces little or no genetic variety in offspring, was like buying many tickets that all have the same number, limiting the chance of \"winning\" - that is, producing surviving offspring. Sexual reproduction, he argued, was like purchasing fewer tickets but with a greater variety of numbers and therefore a greater chance of success. The point of this analogy is that since asexual reproduction does not produce genetic variations, there is little ability to quickly adapt to a changing environment. The lottery principle is less accepted these days because of evidence that asexual reproduction is more prevalent in unstable environments, the opposite of what it predicts.\n\n\n\n\n", "id": "26310", "title": "Reproduction"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51223392", "text": "Brachymeiosis\n\nBrachymeiosis was a hypothesized irregularity in the sexual reproduction of ascomycete fungi, a variant of meiosis following an \"extra\" karyogamy (nuclear fusion) step. The hypothesized process would have transformed four diploid nuclei into eight haploid ones. The current scientific consensus is that brachymeiosis does not occur in any fungi.\n\nAccording to the current understanding, ascomycetes reproduce by forming male and female organs (antheridia/spermatia and ascogonia), transferring haploid nuclei from the antheridium to the ascogonium, and growing a dikaryotic ascus containing both nuclei. Karyogamy then occurs in the ascus to form a diploid nucleus, followed by meiosis and mitosis to form eight haploid nuclei in the ascospores. In 1895, the botanist R.A. Harper reported the observation of a second karyogamy event in the ascogonium prior to ascogeny. This would imply the creation of a tetraploid nucleus in the ascus, rather than a diploid one; in order to produce the observed haploid ascospores, a second meiotic reduction in chromosome count would then be necessary. The second reduction was hypothesized to occur during the second or third mitotic division in the ascus, even though chromosome reduction does not typically occur during mitosis. This supposed form of meiosis was termed “brachymeiosis” in 1908 by H. C. I. Fraser.\n\nThe existence of brachymeiosis was controversial throughout the first half of the twentieth century, with many conflicting results published. Then, research with improved staining techniques established clearly that only one reductive division occurs in the asci of all examined species, including some which had been believed to undergo brachymeiosis. As a result of these studies, the theories of double fusion and subsequent brachymeiosis were discarded around 1950.\n", "id": "51223392", "title": "Brachymeiosis"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31385731", "text": "Telium\n\nTelium, plural Telia, are structures produced by rust fungi as part of the reproductive cycle.\nThey are typically yellow or orange drying to brown or black and are exclusively a mechanism for the release of teliospores which are released by wind or water to infect the alternate host in the rust life-cycle.\n", "id": "31385731", "title": "Telium"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1247882", "text": "Sterile fungi\n\nThe sterile fungi, or \"mycelia sterilia\" are a group of fungi that do not produce any known spores, either sexual or asexual. This is considered a form group, not a taxonomic division, and is used as a matter of convenience. Because these fungi do not produce spores, it is impossible to use traditional methods of morphological comparison to classify them. However, molecular techniques can be applied to determine their evolutionary history.\n", "id": "1247882", "title": "Sterile fungi"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52808816", "text": "Gametogamy\n\nGametogamy is sexual fusion – copulation or fertlization – of two single-celled gametes of different sex and the union of the their gamete nuclei (and corresponding extranuclear structures) giving the zygote nucleus, as well as whole zygotic content. \n\nAccording to its morphology, size and other properties, most forms of gametogamy are as follows:\n\n\n\nFrom such seeds develop plants whose features are identical properties of mothers from which the seed was taken.\n\n", "id": "52808816", "title": "Gametogamy"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14286773", "text": "Delta 6 desaturase\n\nDelta 6 desaturase (D6D or Δ-6-desaturase) is a desaturase enzyme that converts between types of fatty acids (termed \"6\" after omega-6 fatty acids), which are essential nutrients in the human body. The enzyme is molecularly identical across all living things (preserved across Kingdom (biology)) it is present in animals, plants, and cyanobacteria. \n\nD6D is one of the 3 fatty acid desaturases present in humans along with Δ-5 and Δ-9, named so because it was thought to convert only omega-6 fatty acids, but actually converts some others also, and is obligatory to build the longer chain omega-3 fatty acids from other simpler fatty acids in humans . In humans, it is encoded by the FADS2 gene .\n\nD6D is an desaturase enzyme, i.e. introduces a double bond in a specific position of long-chain fatty acids. Among them, it converts between various forms of Omega-3 and Omega-6 fatty acids:\n\nD6D is obligatory along with various elongases to convert to longer chain omega-3's, such as between ALA to EPA as well as EPA to DHA.\n\nGLA deficiencies in animals including humans have shown wide effects down the line -- Dihomogamma-linolenic acid (DGLA) and Prostaglandin E1 deficiency. PGE1 activates T lymphocytes, inhibits smooth muscle proliferation and thrombosis, is important in gonadal function and raises cyclic AMP levels in many tissues. It is a good candidate for a key factor lost in aging. It also affects viability of sperm. and dermatitis.\n\nLevels of D6D rapidly fall rapidly in the testes and more slowly in the liver in aging rats. D6D is a long chain PUFA rate limiter, has greater affinity for ALA than for linoleic acid, nevertheless many diets have far more linoleic acid present, resulting in reduced levels of alpha-Linolenic acid to EPA conversion. Women tend to have higher levels of D6D due to the effects of estrogen .\n\n\n\n", "id": "14286773", "title": "Delta 6 desaturase"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52962850", "text": "Transmasculine reproduction\n\nTransmasculine reproduction is when an individual with a masculine gender identity, who was born with biologically female reproductive organs, conceives and births a child. Transmasculine individuals were assigned female at birth, but identify more on the male side of the gender spectrum than on the female side. These individuals may identify with some stereotypically masculine behaviors and gender performances, but may not necessarily identify with all aspects of masculinity or refer to themselves as “a man”. They are also born with mammary glands and milk ducts, so in most cases it is also possible for them to breastfeed or “chest feed” their children even if they have had their breast surgically removed. Transmasculine reproduction is a matter of sexual and reproductive health, but transmasculine individuals commonly deal with lack of cooperation from health care professionals when attempting to seek medical attention for stereotypically “woman’s health issues”.\n\nTransmasculine individuals have several terms they use to describe the act of feeding their children with their bodies natural lactation. Some commonly used terms include chestfeeding, breastfeeding, nursing, feeding, and mammal feeding. Chestfeeding has become a popular term that can be used by both cisgender and transgender parents to describe feeding their baby, since it is not gender exclusive. The term breastfeeding can cause feelings of gender dysphoria among transgender men. Gender dysphoria is the emotional and psychological distress a person experiences when their gender identity does not aligned with their biological sex, and it can cause extreme anxiety, stress, and depression for those who experience it. Referring to transmasculine people’s chest as breasts can some trigger this dysphoria, which is why gender neutral terms are often preferred. Gender dysphoria can also come to transmasculine individuals through the action of holding their baby to their chest to nurse, since it is a traditionally female action. \n\nAlthough both men and women are born with breasts, the presence of grown breasts on a transgender individual assigned female at birth can lead them to feel extreme discomfort in how their body aligns with their gender identity. It is a common choice for transgender men to have bilateral mastectomies or “chest surgery” due to the gender dysphoria surrounding their breasts. After a transmasculine individual has undergone a bilateral mastectomy their female breasts are no longer present, but they still have some mammary tissue and the ability to lactate. It is not always easy for transgender men to lactate after chest surgery, but with the help of lactation nurses the option is available for those who feel comfortable doing so. Chestfeeding is a personal choice made by some, but not all transmasculine parents and it is just one aspect of transmasculine reproduction.\n\nEven though transmasculine individuals do not identify as women, they still need to screened for the same sexual and reproductive health problems covered in women’s health as long as they have biologically female organs. Most transmasculine individuals are at risk for women’s heath problems like cervical, ovarian, and uterine cancers, unless they have their female organs removed as a part of their transition. Health care providers are not always aware of the necessity for transmasculine people to be tested for women’s health problems. There have been many instances of providers discriminating against trans individuals either by refusing service and treatment or being verbally abusive. Doctors and health care providers should be aware of the needs of patients so they can properly treat them while respecting their gender identity so as to not create further gender dysmorphia. Clinical management of transmasculine patients can be complicated by a lack of knowledge about treatments which may be unfamiliar to physicians and failure to accommodate these patients within healthcare systems leads to deficient health policy. \n", "id": "52962850", "title": "Transmasculine reproduction"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2100624", "text": "Spermatheca\n\nThe spermatheca (pronounced plural: spermathecae ), also called receptaculum seminis (plural: receptacula seminis), is an organ of the female reproductive tract in insects, e.g. bees, some molluscs, oligochaeta worms and certain other invertebrates and vertebrates. Its purpose is to receive and store sperm from the male or, in the case of hermaphrodites, the male component of the body. Spermathecae can sometimes be the site of fertilization when the oocytes are sufficiently developed.\n\nSome species of animal have multiple spermathecae. For example, certain species of earthworms have four pairs of spermathecae—one pair each in the 6th, 7th, 8th, and 9th segments. The spermathecae receive and store the spermatozoa of another earthworm during copulation. They are lined with epithelium and are variable in shape: some are thin, heavily coiled tubes, while others are vague outpocketings from the main reproductive tract. It is one of the many variations in sexual reproduction.\n\nThe nematode \"Caenorhabditis elegans\" has two spermathecae, one at the end of each gonad. The \"C. elegans\" spermatheca is made up of 24 smooth muscle-like cells that form a stretchable tubular structure. Actin filaments line the spermatheca in a circumferential manner. The \"C. elegans\" spermatheca is used as a model to study mechanotransduction.\n\nAn apiculturist may examine the spermatheca of a dead queen bee to find out whether it had received sperm from a male. In many species of stingless bees, especially Melipona bicolor, the queen lays her eggs during the provisioning and oviposition process and the spermatheca fertilizes the egg as it passes along the oviduct. The haplo-diploid system of sex determination makes it possible for the queen to choose the sex of the egg.\n\n", "id": "2100624", "title": "Spermatheca"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=589516", "text": "Sexual maturity\n\nSexual maturity is the age or stage when an organism can reproduce. It is sometimes considered synonymous with adulthood. In humans, the process of sexual maturation is termed \"puberty.\"\n\nMost multicellular organisms are unable to sexually reproduce at birth (or germination), and depending on the species, it may be days, weeks, or years until their bodies are able to do so. Also, certain cues may cause the organism to become sexually mature. They may be external, such as drought, or internal, such as percentage of body fat (such internal cues are not to be confused with hormones which directly produce sexual maturity).\n\nSexual maturity is brought about by a maturing of the reproductive organs and the production of gametes. It may also be accompanied by a growth spurt or other physical changes which distinguish the immature organism from its adult form. These are termed secondary sex characteristics, and often represent an increase in sexual dimorphism. For example, before puberty, human children have flat chests, but adult females have generally larger breasts than adult males. However, there are exceptions such as obesity and hormone imbalances such as gynecomastia.\n\nAfter sexual maturity is achieved, it is possible for some organisms to become infertile, or even to change their sex. Some organisms are hermaphrodites and may or may not be able to produce viable offspring. Also, while in many organisms sexual maturity is strongly linked to age, many other factors are involved, and it is possible for some to display most or all of the characteristics of the adult form without being sexually mature. Conversely it is also possible for the \"immature\" form of an organism to reproduce. This is called \"progenesis\", in which sexual development occurs faster than other physiological development (in contrast, the term \"neoteny\" refers to when non-sexual development is slowed - but the result is the same, the retention of juvenile characteristics into adulthood).\n\n", "id": "589516", "title": "Sexual maturity"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50925207", "text": "Uterine microbiome\n\nThe uterine microbiome is the commensal, nonpathogenic, bacteria, viruses, yeasts/fungi present in a healthy uterus, amniotic fluid and endometrium and the specific environment which they inhabit. It has been only recently confirmed that the uterus and its tissues are not sterile. Due to improved 16S rRNA gene sequencing techniques, detection of bacteria that are present in low numbers is possible.\nUsing this procedure that allows the detection of bacteria that cannot be cultured outside the body, studies of microbiota present in the uterus are expected to increase.\n\nBacteria, viruses and one genus of yeasts are a normal part of the uterus before and during pregnancy. The uterus has been found to possess its own characteristic microbiome that differs significantly from the vaginal microbiome. Despite its close spatial connection with the vagina, the microbiome of the uterus more closely resembles the commensal bacteria found in the oral cavity. \nIn addition, the immune system is able to differentiate between those bacteria normally found in the uterus and those that are pathogenic. Hormonal changes have an effect on the microbiota of the uterus.\n\nThe organisms listed below have been identified as commensals. Some also have the potential for growing to the point of causing disease:\nOther taxa can be present, without causing disease or an immune response. Their presence is associated with negative birth outcomes.\n\nProphylactic antibiotics have been injected into the uterus to treat infertility. This has been done before the transfer of embryos with the intent to improve implantation rates. No association exists between successful implantation and antibiotic treatment. Infertility treatments often progress to the point where a microbiological analysis of the uterine microbiota is performed. Preterm birth is associated with certain species of bacteria that are not normally part of the healthy uterine microbiome.\n\nThe healthy uterine microbiota at the mucosal-epithelium and trophoblast implantation site is regulated by macrophages. These macrophages control the microbiota and secrete antimicrobial substances that regulate the population of the commensal bacteria and help to prevent infection with pathogenic bacteria. The immune response becomes more pronounced when bacteria are found that are not commensal.\n\nInvestigations into reproductive-associated microbiomes began around 1885 by Theodor Escherich. He wrote that meconium from the newborn was free of bacteria. This was interpreted as the uterine environment was sterile. Other investigations used sterile diapers for meconium collection. No bacteria were able to be cultured from the samples. Bacteria were detected and were directly proportional to the time between birth and the passage of meconium.\n\nInvestigations into the role of the uterine microbiome in the development of the infant microbiome are ongoing.\n\n", "id": "50925207", "title": "Uterine microbiome"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=96628", "text": "Offspring\n\nIn biology, offspring are the young born of living organisms, produced either by a single organism or, in the case of sexual reproduction, two organisms. Collective offspring may be known as a brood or progeny in a more general way. This can refer to a set of simultaneous offspring, such as the chicks hatched from one clutch of eggs, or to all the offspring, as with the honeybee.\n\nHuman offspring (descendants) are referred to as children (without reference to age, thus one can refer to a parent's \"minor children\" or \"adult children\" or \"infant children\" or \"teenage children\" depending on their age); male children are sons and female children are daughters (see kinship and descent). Offspring can occur after mating or after artificial insemination.\n\nOffspring contains many parts and properties that are precise and accurate in what they consist of, and what they define. As the offspring of a new species, also known as a child or f1 generation, consist of genes of the father and the mother, which is also known as the parent generation. Each of these offspring contains numerous genes which have coding for specific tasks and properties. Males and females both contribute equally to the genotypes of their offspring, in which gametes fuse and form. An important aspect of the formation of the parent offspring is the chromosome, which is a structure of DNA which contains many genes.\n\nTo focus more on the offspring and how it results in the formation of the f1 generation, is an inheritance called sex-linkage, which is a gene which is located on the sex chromosome and patterns of these inheritance differ in both male and female. The explanation that proves the theory of the offspring having genes from both parent generations, is proven through a process called crossing-over, which consists of taking genes from the male chromosomes and genes from the female chromosome, resulting in a process of meiosis occurring, and leading to the splitting of the chromosomes evenly. Depending on which genes are dominantly expressed in the gene will result in the sex of the offspring. The female will always give an X chromosome, whereas the male, depending on the situation, will either give an X chromosome or a Y chromosome. If a male offspring is produced, the gene will consist of an X and a Y chromosome. If two X chromosomes are expressed and produced, it produces a female offspring.\n\nCloning is the production of an offspring which represents the identical genes as its parent. Reproductive cloning begins with the removal of the nucleus from an egg, which holds the genetic material. In order to clone an organ, a stem cell is to be produced and then utilized to clone that specific organ. A common misconception of cloning is that it produces an exact copy of the parent being cloned. Cloning copies the DNA/genes of the parent and then creates a genetic duplicate. The clone will not be a similar copy as he or she will grow up in different surroundings from the parent and may encounter different opportunities and experiences. Although mostly positive, cloning also faces some setbacks in terms of ethics and human health. Though cell division and DNA replication is a vital part of survival, there are many steps involved and mutations can occur with permanent change in an organism's and their offspring's DNA. Some mutations can be good as they result in random evolution periods in which may be good for the species, but most mutations are bad as they can change the genotypes of offspring, which can result in changes that harm the species.\n\n", "id": "96628", "title": "Offspring"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31869754", "text": "Tetraspore\n\nTetraspores are red algae spores produced by the tetrasporophytic (diploid) phase in the life history of algae in the Rhodophyta as a result of meiosis. The name is derived from the 4 spores that form after this meiosis, the division is of three kinds: cruciate, zonate and tetrahedral. \n", "id": "31869754", "title": "Tetraspore"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43806093", "text": "Induced ovulation (animals)\n\nOvulation occurs at the ovary surface and is described as the process in which an oocyte (female germ cell) is released from the follicle. Ovulation is a non-deleterious 'inflammatory response' which is initiated by a Luteinising Hormone (LH) surge. The mechanism of ovulation varies between species. In humans the ovulation process occurs around day 14 of the menstrual cycle, this can also be referred to as 'cyclical spontaneous ovulation'. However the monthly menstruation process is typically linked to humans and primates, all other animal species ovulate by various other mechanisms.\n\nSpontaneous ovulation is the ovulatory process in which the maturing ovarian follicles secrete ovarian steroids to generate pulsatile GnRH (the neuropeptide which controls all vertebrate reproductive function) release into the median eminence (the area which connects the hypothalamus to the anterior pituitary gland) to ultimately cause a pre-ovulatory LH surge. Spontaneously ovulating species go through menstrual cycles and are fertile at certain times based on what part of the cycle they are in. Species in which the females are spontaneous ovulators include rats, mice, guinea pigs, sheep, monkeys, and humans.\n\nInduced ovulation is the process in which the pre-ovulatory LH surge and therefore ovulation is induced by some component of coitus e.g. receipt of genital stimulation. Usually spontaneous steroid-induced LH surges are not observed in induced ovulator species throughout their reproductive cycles, which indicates that GnRH release is absent or reduced due to lack of positive feedback action from steroid hormones. However, by contradiction some spontaneously ovulating species can occasionally undergo mating-induced preovulatory LH surges. Species in which the females are induced ovulators include cats, rabbits, ferrets, and camels. In 1985, Chen et al., used Bactrian camels to investigate the factor(s) that induce ovulation during breeding season. They monitored the camel ovaries for ovulation by rectal palpation following insemination of semen samples. Chen et al., concluded that in this particular camel species ovulation was induced by the seminal plasma, and not by the spermatozoa.\n\nAlthough the evolution of these two types of ovulation is not well understood, the type of ovulation that would be advantageous in some species can be understood by looking at social groups. Animals that have large, complex social groups benefit from spontaneous ovulation as only the best males get to breed with females. If there are little males suitable for breeding it makes sense to spread out the times at which females are fertile, therefore increasing the proportion in which conception occurs. This does not explain the evolution of ovulation in all species however, for example some species appear to show estrus synchronisation.\n\nIn spontaneous ovulators, estrogen secreted by the follicles as they grow and mature affects the release of GnRH, and therefore causes an LH surge.\n\nOvulation is triggered in induced ovulators by a LH surge from the anterior pituitary, which appears to be independent of GnRH release, and is induced during mating. Animals this has been recorded in include rabbits, voles, ferrets and camels. In some species such as the ferret the duration of intromission has no effect on the LH surge, whereas in other species such as the cat these are related and higher levels of LH were produced by mating multiple times. In many species, for a LH surge to occur, little intromission is required.\n\nThe pathways in which information reaches the brain and causes GnRH release are not understood well, however midbrain and brainstem noradrenergic neurones appear to be activated in response to intromission during mating. These neurones then go on to stimulate the mediobasal hypothalamic to release GnRH from the median eminence. Most experiments on GnRH and LH release have been focused on spontaneous ovulators, however there have been studies completed on some induced ovulators - rabbit and ferret. From this, it appears that norepinephrine facilitates GnRH release in the rabbit and ferret and the locus coereuleus which is the part of the brain involved in conveying genital-somatosensory information to the GnRH neurones. Other subsances that have similar effects include neuropeptide Y.\n\nMany species which have been found to be induced ovulators and the reasons for this are not always clear. However, one possible reason is that induced ovulation could provide a better reproductive potential for those species that typically have shorter life spans and less encounters resulting in lower mating opportunities throughout their lifetime.\n\nRodents such as mice and rats are known induced ovulators. In Rats the East African root rat and the Cape-Dune, Natal, Highvield and blind mole rats are known induced ovulators. These species require mating to stimulate the vagina and cervix, resulting in ovulation in the Females. The East African Root Rat has been found to have small spines on its penis which are also thought to contribute to this stimulation of induced ovulation.\n\nMice are also thought to be induced ovulators. Studies have found that the Lutenising Hormone (LH) is crucial to bring about the induced ovulation. Disruption in LH surges in the mice and knockout of the Progesterone receptor (progesterone is known to help maintain a pregnancy) results in lowered fertility of the mice.\n\nThe Koala species are a lesser known induced ovulatory. The Koalas require mating in which the presence of ejaculated semen is needed to stimulate the female to produce a LH surge (which would cause ovulation of a follicle). Unlike many other animals, simply being in the presence of a male koala is not enough to induce ovulation itself, nor is vaginal stimulation on its own sufficient to cause induced ovulation to occur.\n\nThe presence of koala semen in female koalas is known to be able to cause induced ovulation on its own, however only in just under 50% of the subjects tested but statistical t tests confirmed this to be significant.\n\nCats are another widely known induced ovulator. After mating, the LH levels in female cats surge, and the time to ovulation can be predicted to occur between 1–2 days later.\n\nGoats too have been found to be induced ovulators. A 1984 study saw LHRH injections were able to cause ovulation in goats that were of sexual maturity and already in oestrus. These injections had no influence on goats that were not in oestrus and could be because there is reduced sensitivity to LH and FSH receptors in the non oestrus stages of the cycle so the LHRH may not have been able to induce a great enough response.\n\nWolverines are other known induced ovulators which require physical mating to cause ovulation.\n\nHorses are induced ovulators and studies using combinations of PGF2alpa analogues, Lipsostiol, d-cloprostenol and hCG were able to artificially induce ovulation in this species though these neural pathways.\n\nInduced ovulation occurs in various carnivoran species. Many bear species are able to have induced ovulation including the Grizzly bear, Black Bear and the Polar bear where both the presence of a male and mating itself are requirements for induced ovulation. However, there are some suggestions that mating is not as strict a requirement for ovulation in bears.\n\nBlack Bears are widely confirmed induced ovulators. It was observed that most females kept separate from males did not ovulate, where as females kept in areas with male bears did. Mating between the bears caused elevated progesterone levels, and this was seen by increased progesterone levels measured in the bears in the months that followed the mating seasons. In black bears the presence of a males was enough to cause a notable rise in progesterone levels even without mating but mating. This could suggest that pheromonal/chemosensory factors could also contribute to induced ovulation in some species.\n\nInduced ovulation is able to occur in some fish species. In china freshwater fish including a variety of carp types, bream and loach are able to be induced to ovulate by using agonists of dopamine. This induction of ovulation from drugs is able to cause a predictable ovulation period and is very beneficial to farming of these species.\n\nThe natural cycle of spontaneous ovulation occurs in species such as cows. There is a great demand for ovulation to be induced in cattle, as it allows farmers to synchronize their cattle to ovulate at the same time, helping improve the efficiency of dairy farming. Induced ovulation can be utilized during the warmer seasons to increase plasma progesterone and improve the fertility of the cattle. However, ovulation can only be induced in cows with mature follicles and merely initiates lutenization, it does not reduce the time for ovulation.\n\nThere are a number of methods that are used to induce ovulation in cattle such as: artificial insemination, introducing a number of hormones such as chorionic gonadotrophin, hCG and LH. As well as injecting progesterone by intravaginal devices called PRIDs (progesterone-releasing intravaginal devices)\n\nDomestic cats are often described as induced ovulators. During intromission, the penis probably causes distension of the posterior vagina and induces release of gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH) from the hypothalamus via neuroendocrine reflexes. A surge of luteinising hormone (LH) occurs within minutes of mating. With multiple matings, the LH surge is greater and lasts longer than when only one mating occurs. There are reports of ovulation without mating in cats. Spontaneous ovulation not only occurs in cats, but occurs with some frequency. It appears that non-copulatory ovulation may be possible in response to a variety of visual, auditory or olfactory cues. It is more appropriate to consider domestic cats to be both an induced and spontaneous ovulator.\n\nIt has been known since 1905 that domestic rabbits are physically induced ovulators, although they may also ovulate spontaneously. Early reports stated that simply having an oestrous doe in close proximity to a buck can induce ovulation, although there were no data presented in these early reports.\n\nDromedary camels (\"Camelus dromedarius\"), bactrian camels (\"Camelus bactrianus\"), llamas (\"Lama glama\") and alpacas (\"Lama pacos\") are all induced ovulators.\n\nBactrian camels ovulate after insemination of semen into the vagina; it is the seminal plasma, but not the spermatozoa, which induces ovulation. Ovulation occurs in 87% of females after insemination: 66% ovulate within 36 h and the rest by 48 h (the same as natural mating). The least amount of semen required to elicit ovulation is about 1.0 ml.\n\nIn alpaca, follicles ovulate approximately 26 h after coital stimulation. Mounting accompanied by intromission is necessary to provide adequate stimulation for LH release and subsequent ovulation. Deposition of semen, which contains ovulation-inducing factor (OIF), has been shown to increase the chance of pregnancy. Prolonged copulation, causing abrasion and inflammation of the uterus, may enhance absorption of OIF.\n", "id": "43806093", "title": "Induced ovulation (animals)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55362208", "text": "Ovarian follicle activation\n\nOvarian follicle activation can be defined as primordial follicles in the ovary moving from a quiescent (inactive) to a growing phase. The primordial follicle in the oocyte is what makes up the “pool” of follicles that will be induced to enter growth and developmental changes that change them into pre-ovulatory follicles, ready to be released during ovulation. The process of development from a primordial follicle to a pre-ovulatory follicle is called folliculogenesis.\n\nActivation of the primordial follicle involves the following: a morphological change from flattened to cuboidal granulosa cells, proliferation of granulosa cells, formation of the protective zona pellucida layer, and growth of the oocyte.\n\nIt is widely understood that androgens act primarily on preantral follicles and that this activity is important for preantral follicle growth. Additionally, it is thought that androgens are involved in primordial follicle activation. However, the influence of androgens on primordial follicle recruitment and whether this response is primary or secondary is still uncertain.\n\nPrimordial follicles are activated to grow into antral follicles. Communication between the oocytes and the surrounding somatic cells, such as the granulosa cells and the theca cells, is involved in the control of primordial follicle activation. There are various activator signalling pathways that are involved in the control of ovarian follicle activation, including: Neurotropin, nerve growth factor (NGF) and its tyrosine receptor kinase (NTRK1), neurotrophin 4 (NT4), brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and their receptor NTRK2. Additional ligands have a role in facilitating primordial follicle activation such as transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-B), growth differentiation factor 9 (GDF9) and bone morphogenic protein 15 (BMP15).\n\nFollicular activation rate is increased in experiments where recombinant GDF9 is added. Additionally, in vitro addition of GDF9 to human ovarian cortical tissue causes enhanced activation and follicular survival. Removing GDF9 from mice, through knock-out experiments, halts follicle progression beyond the first stage, and prevents granulosa cell proliferation. However, these GDF9 null mice have accelerated oocyte growth, suggesting that GDF9 is partially responsible for granulosa cell recruitment, as well as inhibiting oocyte growth. GDF9 promotes follicular survival and growth as a result of dampened granulosa apoptosis and follicular atresia.\n\nAs discussed above TGF-β ligands, for example BMP4 and 7 have a role in follicular activation. SMADS are downstream molecules of the TGF-β signalling pathway, hence rely on TGF-β for activation. In the absence of SMADs, mice have decreased folliculogenesis, with decreased quantities of primordial follicles, as well as developed adult follicles at both developmental stages. BMP15 has been shown to stimulate granulosa cell growth by encouraging proliferation of undifferentiated granulosa cells. This is not dependent on FSH. It was shown that two proliferation markers, Ki-67 and proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), are regulated by these factors. Additionally, PCNA has been suggested to act as a key regulator of ovarian follicle development. The temporal expression of PCNA in oocytes is coincident with the start of primordial follicle formation. PCNA promotes apoptosis of oocytes, which regulates primordial follicle assembly.\n\nAnother molecule that has been implicated in the activation of oocyte follicles is Forkhead boxL2 (Foxl2). In knock out studies, it has been shown that Foxl2 may be responsible for the cuboidal transition of the pre-granulosa cells. Hence, when Foxl2 is removed, the primordial follicles are unable to develop into secondary follicles.\n\nSpermatogenesis-and-oogenesis-specific basic helix-loop-helix containing protein 1 (Sohlh1) is expressed within germ cell clusters and in new primordial follicles. Knock out studies of this protein in mice show a reduced number of oocytes present at 7 weeks post birth and a malfunction in the transition from primordial to primary follicle.\n\nPhosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) is a tumour suppressor gene whose actions directly affect the activation of primordial follicles. It does this by negatively controlling the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway. This particular action of PTEN was initially discovered in an experiment using PTEN knockout mice. The absence of PTEN within the primordial follicles lead to an increase in AKT phosphorylation. This then creates a subsequent rise in FOXO3 export, as AKT is no longer inhibiting its production. This led to over-activation of the primordial follicles, which resulted in a premature decline of the primordial follicle pool.\n\nWhen Foxo3 is KO in mice models a huge uncontrolled activation of follicles is seen thus the mouse ovaries are deficient of the entire pool of primordial follicles because they have been prematurely activated. This action is regulated by phosphorylation, the unphosphorylated form is transcriptionally active in the nucleus. However, when phosphorylation occurs the protein is transported to the cytoplasm and loses its transcriptional activity. Pelosi et al. noted that the timing and level of the Foxo3 expression is very important to regulate ovarian follicle activation.\n\nAKt- PTEN-AKt and Foxo3 are all involved in the same pathway. PTEN is situated upstream of AKt. Therefore, if PTEN is deleted specifically from an oocyte this causes an increase in AKt activity resulting in large numbers of dormant ovarian follicles resuming their growth and differentiation. The TSC complex also plays an important role in this pathways by suppressing the activity of mTOR which has been proven to be essential for maintaining dormancy.\n\nTuberin/tuberous sclerosis complex is also thought to be important in the regulation of primordial follicle activation. TSC negatively controls the function of mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin). TSC knockout mice have a raised level of mTORC1 activity. Suppressing mTORC1 is a necessary process to prevent primordial follicles from being prematurely activated and therefore premature ovarian insufficiency.\n\nAMH (Anti-mullerian Hormone) is a member of the transforming growth factor beta (TGF-b), that has a very important role in regulating both testicular and ovarian function. In the first instance AMH inhibits the initial enrollment of the resting primordial follicles. Secondly AMH prevents the regulation of preantral/small antral follicle growth by reducing their responsiveness to FSH.\n\nP27 inhibits cell cycle progression at the G1 phase by preventing the action of cyclin E-Cdk2. Due to its’ important role in the cell cycle, it is found within the nucleus of mice oocytes in primordial and primary follicles. During puberty of p27 knock out mice, all primordial follicles are activated and leads to POF. This indicates that p27 is a vital regulator in maintaining a quiescent state in primordial follicles.\n\nPremature ovarian failure (POF), or premature ovarian insufficiency (POI), is a female reproductive disorder characterised by at least 4 months of primary or secondary amenorrhea, before the age of 40. It is caused by either a decrease in the primordial follicle pool, accelerated atresia of follicles or altered maturation or recruitment of primordial follicles and is associated with menopausal levels of follicle stimulating hormones, exceeding 40 Ul/L. Specific activator and suppressor genes are implicated in ovarian follicle activation and recent research suggests that POF may be the consequence of a genetic mutation in one or more of these genes.\n\nFOXL2 - FOXL2 knockout mouse models showed failure of granulosa cell differentiation, which led to the premature activation and depletion of primordial follicles, characteristic of POF. Two different variations of mutations in the FOXL2 gene, which cause different forms of POF, one with earlier onset and the other with later onset and incomplete penetrance, have been identified. Additionally, mutations in the FOXL2 gene have been found in approximately 5% of nonsyndromic POF patients, which suggests that FOXL2 mutations are also associated with idiopathic POF.\n\nBMP15 and GDF9 - Mutations in BMP15 and GDF9 genes can be involved in POF, but are not major causes of the disease. For example, low GDF9 mutation frequency has been found in a large cohort of Indian cases of POF.\n\nSOHLH1 - Little is known about the causative association of SOHLH1 and POF, however three novel SOHLH1 variants have been found to potentially cause the disease and when studied, they were absent in controls.\n\nAMH - A decrease in AMH expression in POF antral follicles leads to defective antral development.\n\nmTORC1 and PI3K - Deregulation of mTORC1 and PI3K signaling pathways in oocytes results in ovarian pathological conditions, including POF and subsequent infertility.\n\nPTEN - Studies of mice with a deletion in PTEN in the oocytes showed early activation of the entire pool of primordial follicles, leading to a lack of primordial follicles in adulthood, resulting in a POF phenotype.\n\nFoxo3a - Studies into mice with complete and partial Foxo3a deletions also showed premature activation of the entire primordial follicle pool, destroying the ovarian reserve and leading to oocyte death. This led to a POF phenotype, seen in studies in a range of countries.\n\nTSC - In the oocytes of Tsc2 knockout mice, elevated mTORC1 activity causes the pool of primordial follicles to become activated prematurely. This results in follicle depletion in early adulthood, causing POF.\n\nAs well as having many genetic causes, has been shown to be a side effect of many chemotherapeutic agents. The damage suffered by ovaries appears to be , and a class of chemotherapy drugs known as , seem to cause the most damage to the ovary and follicles. There are two ways in which this damage occurs:\nChemotherapeutic agents, such as Cyclophosphamide, have been shown to activate the PI3K/PTEN/Akr pathway, which is the main pathway involved in keeping the follicles dormant and permitting them to grow - activation of this pathway encourages more primordial follicles to grow and develop. These growing follicles may then be destroyed in subsequent rounds of chemotherapy, which often target growing cells, which will then cause more primordial follicles to differentiate and grow to replace the destroyed cells. This concept, known as burnout, leads to a depletion of the ovarian reserve and results in premature ovarian failure.\n\nOocyte cryopreservation is a preservative process which can be used as a way of preserving fertility in children treated for childhood or adolescent cancer, and to avoid the damage caused to the ovaries caused by cytotoxic drugs often used in chemotherapy. There are several methods of , each with different levels of effectiveness. After cryopreservation, the ovarian tissue must be placed back into the patient, in order to allow the ovary to function normally again and regain fertility.\n\nRestoration of the ovarian function occurs in almost all cases of , but it takes a while for the ovarian follicles to regain full function. In all cases of successful function restoration, it took 3.5-6.5 months after reimplantation before a rise in , a key hormone produced by the ovary, and a decrease in (FSH) were detected. The variation in time difference may be due to differences in the follicular reserves in the women at the time of cryopreservation.\n", "id": "55362208", "title": "Ovarian follicle activation"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56075062", "text": "Capital and income breeding\n\nCapital breeding and income breeding refer to the methods by which some organisms time breeding and use resources to finance breeding. In the models, capital breeders breed when they reach a threshold condition, which decreases throughout the breeding season. They also use energy stores that were built up before breeding. This is in comparison to income breeders, who breed after certain levels, which do not change, of increase in condition are reached and who use energy built up just before breeding to finance reproduction. Income breeders who are growing especially fast hold off the development of their offspring after a threshold is reached so they can produce more offspring, although this does not occur in slower growing income breeders. An organism can be both a capital and an income breeder; the parasitoid \"Eupelmus vuilletti\", for example, is an income breeder in terms of sugars, but a capital breeder in terms of lipids. A different example of the interaction between capital and income breeding is found in \"Vipera aspis\"; although these snakes are capital breeders, they lay larger litters when food is abundant, which is a characteristic of income breeders.\n\nThe dichotomy between income and capital breeders was introduced in 1980 by R. H. Drent and S. Daan to explain why birds usually laid their eggs later than the time that would maximize nestling survival for the population.\n\nEctotherms are generally capital breeders, whereas endotherms rely on income breeding more often. This difference is likely due to the difference in maintenance costs, and thus in the energy that can be allocated to stores.\n\nIn organisms that breed multiple times and live in places where food availability and mortality change significantly on the basis of season, it is predicted that capital breeding will be more prevalent, as the time when the organism is not breeding but when conditions are still favourable will be dedicated to rebuilding stores, therefore allowing them to achieve higher rates of reproduction. Capital breeding also increases with size (at least in organisms with optimal storage and indeterminate growth), as the energy dedicated to growth gives less and less return, thus meaning that energy dedicated to storage will have more return compared to that dedicated to growth. Income breeding, on the other hand, will be favoured in non-seasonal environments, as holding off breeding will not increase the chances that the offspring will survive.\n\nThis model does not hold for organisms that have a feeding season right after the breeding season. Copepods, for example, have their breeding season just before the feeding season, and are primarily divided into mainly capital or mainly income breeders on the basis of geography.\nEndotherms have a higher level of energy that needs to be dedicated to maintenance, thus explaining their increased reliance on income breeding.\nThe terms capital breeding and income breeding originated to explain why most individuals lay after the time when nestlings are most likely to survive. Both systems fit with the optimal time of laying for low-quality and high-quality individuals. High-quality individuals may choose to hold off laying until another egg is produced, as the decrease in the likelihood of survival for each egg is compensated by the additional egg. This is the opposite in low-quality individuals, in which the time to make an extra egg decreases the survival of each egg to the point where an additional egg cannot compensate for this loss.\nThe reliance of capital and income breeding in pinnipeds primarily depends on the availability of food, with more food favouring an increased reliance on capital breeding. This is because increase food availability allows for the accumulation of capital, which allows for a species to use capital breeding, which is more efficient as there are less energetic costs associated with it. Increased seasonality is another factor in capital versus income breeding, with higher seasonality associated with an increased reliance on income breeding, for the reasons discussed previously. Increased unpredictability also affects a pinnipeds reliance on capital breeding; less predictability increase reliance on capital breeding, as a species can use its accumulated stores to breed when there is less food available, whereas an income breeder cannot.\n\nEctotherms are generally capital breeders, likely because of the fact that they have a lower level of body maintenance, meaning that more energy can be converted to body stores.\nCopepods generally have their reproduction strategy influenced by geography, with those at higher latitudes usually being capital breeders, and those in waters closer to the equator conforming to the income breeding strategy. This is because more temperate waters allow for a longer feeding season, which allows for multiple generations in income breeders (who reproduce during the feeding season), whereas colder seas with shorter feeding seasons favour capital breeders, who are not as much affected compared to income breeders by having to get their offspring to maturity before the feeding season ends. The length of the feeding season also selects for size in these organisms; income breeders are as small as possible so they can take advantage of having multiple generations per breeding season, in contrast with capital breeders, which are as large as possible so as to catch the most food to put into their reserves.\n", "id": "56075062", "title": "Capital and income breeding"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52507691", "text": "Autogamy\n\nAutogamy, or self-fertilization, refers to the fusion of two gametes that come from one individual. Autogamy is predominantly observed in the form of self-pollination, a reproductive mechanism employed by many flowering plants. However, species of protists have also been observed using autogamy as a means of reproduction. Flowering plants engage in autogamy regularly, while the protists that engage in autogamy only do so in stressful environments.\n\n\"Paramecium aurelia\" is the most commonly studied protozoan for autogamy. Similar to other unicellular organisms, \"Paramecium aurelia\" typically reproduce asexually via binary fission or sexually via cross-fertilization. However, studies have shown that when put under nutritional stress, \"Paramecium aurelia\" will undergo meiosis and subsequent fusion of gametic-like nuclei. This process, defined as hemixis, a chromosomal rearrangement process, takes place in a number of steps. First, the two micronuclei of Paramecium aurelia enlarge and divide two times to form eight nuclei. Some of these daughter nuclei will continue to divide to create potential future gametic nuclei. Of these potential gametic nuclei, one will divide two more times. Of the four daughter nuclei arising from this step, two of them become anlagen, or cells that will form part of the new organism. The other two daughter nuclei become the gametic micronuclei that will undergo autogamous self-fertilization. These nuclear divisions are observed mainly when the Paramecium aurelia is put under nutritional stress. Research shows that \"Paramecium aurelia\" undergo autogamy synchronously with other individuals of the same species.\n\nIn \"Paramecium tetraurelia\", vitality declines over the course of successive asexual cell divisions by binary fission. Clonal aging is associated with a dramatic increase in DNA damage. When paramecia that have experienced clonal aging undergo meiosis, either during conjugation or automixis, the old micronucleus disintegrates and a new macronucleus is formed by replication of the micronuclear DNA that had just experienced meiosis followed by syngamy. These paramecia are rejuvenated in the sense of having a restored clonal lifespan. Thus it appears that clonal aging is due in large part to the progressive accumulation of DNA damage, and that rejuvenation is due to repair of DNA damage during meiosis that occurs in the micronucleus during conjugation or automixis and reestablishment of the macronucleus by replication of the newly repaired micronuclear DNA.\n\nSimilar to Paramecium aurelia, the parasitic ciliate \"Tetrahymena rostrata\" has also been shown to engage in meiosis, autogamy and development of new macronuclei when placed under nutritional stress. Due to the degeneration and remodeling of genetic information that occurs in autogamy, genetic variability arises and possibly increases an offspring’s chances of survival in stressful environments.\n\n\"Allogromia laticollaris\" is perhaps the best-studied foraminiferan amoeboid for autogamy. \"Allogromia laticollaris\" can alternate between sexual reproduction via cross-fertilization and asexual reproduction via binary fission. The details of the life cycle of Allogromia laticollaris are unknown, but similar to \"Paramecium aurelia\", \"Allogromia laticollaris\" is also shown to sometimes defer to autogamous behavior when placed in nutritional stress. As seen in Paramecium, there is some nuclear dimorphism observed in \"Allogromia laticollaris.\" There are often observations of macronuclei and chromosomal fragments coexisting in \"Allogromia laticollaris.\" This is indicative of nuclear and chromosomal degeneration, a process similar to the subdivisions observed in \"Paramecium aurelia.\" Multiple generations of haploid \"Allogromia laticollaris\" individuals can exist before autogamy actually takes place. The autogamous behavior in Allogromia laticollaris has the added consequence of giving rise to daughter cells that are substantially smaller than those rising from binary fission. It is hypothesized that this is a survival mechanism employed when the cell is in stressful environments, and thus not able to allocate all resources to creating offspring. If a cell was under nutritional stress and not able to function regularly, there would be a strong possibility of its offspring’s fitness being sub-par.\n\nSelf-pollination is an example of autogamy that occurs in flowering plants. Self-pollination occurs when the sperm in the pollen from the stamen of a plant goes to the carpels of that same plant and fertilizes the egg cell present. Self-pollination can either be done completely autogamously or geitonogamously. In the former, the egg and sperm cells that united came from the same flower. In the latter, the sperm and egg cells can come from a different flower on the same plant. While the latter method does blur the lines between autogamous self-fertilization and normal sexual reproduction, it is still considered autogamous self-fertilization.\n\nSelf-pollination can lead to inbreeding depression due to expression of deleterious recessive mutations. Meiosis followed by self-pollination results in little genetic variation, raising the question of how meiosis in self-pollinating plants is adaptively maintained over an extended period in preference to a less complicated and less costly asexual ameiotic process for producing progeny. For instance, \"Arabidopsis thaliana\" is a predominantly self-pollinating plant that has an outcrossing rate in the wild estimated at less than 0.3%, and self-pollination appears to have evolved roughly a million years ago or more. An adaptive benefit of meiosis that may explain its long-term maintenance in self-pollinating plants is efficient recombinational repair of DNA damage.\n\n There are several advantages for the self-fertilization observed in flowering plants and protists. In flowering plants, it is important for some plants not to be dependent on pollinating agents that other plants rely for fertilization. This is unusual, however, considering that many plant species have evolved to become incompatible with their own gametes. While these species would not be well served by having autogamous self-fertilization as a reproductive mechanism, other species, which do not have self-incompatibility, would benefit from autogamy. Protists have the advantage of diversifying their modes of reproduction. This is useful for a multitude of reasons. First, if there is an unfavorable change in the environment that puts the ability to deliver offspring at risk, then it is advantageous for an organism to have autogamy at its disposal. In other organisms, it is seen that genetic diversity arising from sexual reproduction is maintained by changes in the environment that favor certain genotypes over others.\nAside from extreme circumstances, it is possible that this form of reproduction gives rise to a genotype in the offspring that will increase fitness in the environment. This is due to the nature of the genetic degeneration and remodeling intrinsic to autogamy in unicellular organisms. Thus, autogamous behavior may become advantageous to have if an individual wanted to ensure offspring viability and survival. This advantage also applies to flowering plants. However, it is important to note that this change has not shown to produce a progeny with more fitness in unicellular organisms. It is possible that the nutrition deprived state of the parent cells before autogamy created a barrier for producing offspring that could thrive in those same stressful environments.\n\n In flowering plants, autogamy has the disadvantage of producing low genetic diversity in the species that use it as the predominant mode of reproduction. This leaves those species particularly susceptible to pathogens and viruses that can harm it. In addition, the foraminiferans that use autogamy have shown to produce substantially smaller progeny as a result. This indicates that since it is generally an emergency survival mechanism for unicellular species, the mechanism does not have the nutritional resources that would be provided by the organism if it were undergoing binary fission.\n\n The evolutionary shift from outcrossing to self-fertilization is one of the most frequent evolutionary transitions in plants. About 10-15% of flowering plants are predominantly self-fertilizing.\nSince autogamy in flowering plants and autogamy in unicellular species is fundamentally different, and plants and protists are not related, it is likely that both instances evolved separately. In flowering plants, it is believed that autogamy evolved one million years ago. However, due to the little overall genetic variation that arises in progeny, it is not fully understood how autogamy has been maintained in the tree of life.\n", "id": "52507691", "title": "Autogamy"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44116266", "text": "Effector-triggered immunity\n\nEffector-triggered immunity (ETI) is a property of the innate immune system. ETI was first identified in plants but has also been identified in animal cells.\n\nThe innate immune system is common to all multicellular organisms and forms the first line of defense against pathogens. Infected cells recognize that they are under attack by detecting the pathogen directly through the Pathogen Associated Molecular Patterns (PAMPS) which bind with the Pattern Recognition Receptors (PRR) on the host cells. Host cells also recognize the pathogen through effector-triggered immunity, whereby the host cells are alerted to the pathogen by the associated damage caused by pathogenic toxins or effectors.\n", "id": "44116266", "title": "Effector-triggered immunity"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=604020", "text": "Mosaic (genetics)\n\nIn genetics, a mosaic, or mosaicism, is the presence of two or more populations of cells with different genotypes in one individual, who has developed from a single fertilized egg. Mosaicism has been reported to be present in as high as 70% of cleavage stage embryos and 90% of blastocyst-stage embryos derived from in vitro fertilization.\n\nGenetic mosaicism can result from many different mechanisms including chromosome non-disjunction, anaphase lag and endoreplication. Anaphase lagging is the most common way by which mosaicism arises in the preimplantation embryo. Mosaicism can also result from a mutation in one cell during development in which the mutation is passed on to only its daughter cells. Therefore, the mutation is only going to be present in a fraction of the adult cells.\n\nGenetic mosaics may often be confused with chimerism, in which two or more genotypes arise in one individual similarly to mosaicism. However, the two genotypes arise from the fusion of more than one fertilized zygote in the early stages of embryonic development, rather than from a mutation.\n\nDifferent types of mosaicism exist, such as gonadal mosaicism (restricted to the gametes) or tissue or somatic mosaicism.\n\nSomatic mosaicism occurs when the somatic cells of the body are of more than one genotype. In the more common mosaics, different genotypes arise from a single fertilized egg cell, due to mitotic errors at first or later cleavages.\n\nIn rare cases, intersex conditions can be caused by mosaicism where some cells in the body have XX and others XY chromosomes (46, XX/XY). In the fruit fly \"Drosophila melanogaster\", where a fly possessing two X chromosomes is a female and a fly possessing a single X chromosome is a sterile male, a loss of an X chromosome early in embryonic development can result in sexual mosaics, or gynandropmorphs. Likewise, a loss of the Y chromosome can result in XY/X mosaic males.\n\nThe most common form of mosaicism found through prenatal diagnosis involves trisomies. Although most forms of trisomy are due to problems in meiosis and affect all cells of the organism, there are cases where the trisomy occurs in only a selection of the cells. This may be caused by a nondisjunction event in an early mitosis, resulting in a loss of a chromosome from some trisomic cells. Generally this leads to a milder phenotype than in non-mosaic patients with the same disorder.\n\nAn example of this is one of the milder forms of Klinefelter syndrome, called \"46/47 XY/XXY mosaic\" wherein some of the patient's cells contain XY chromosomes, and some contain XXY chromosomes. The \"46/47\" annotation indicates that the XY cells have the normal number of 46 total chromosomes, and the XXY cells have a total of 47 chromosomes.\n\nAround 30% of Turner's syndrome cases demonstrate mosaicism, while complete monosomy (45, X) occurs in about 50–60% of cases.\n\nBut mosaicism need not necessarily be deleterious. Revertant somatic mosaicism is a rare recombination event in which there is a spontaneous correction of a mutant, pathogenic allele. In revertant mosaicism, the healthy tissue formed by mitotic recombination can outcompete the original, surrounding mutant cells in tissues like blood and epithelia that regenerate often. In the skin disorder ichthyosis with confetti, normal skin spots appear early in life and increase in number and size over time.\n\nOther endogenous factors can also lead to mosaicism including mobile elements, DNA polymerase slippage, and unbalanced chromosomal segregation. Exogenous factors include nicotine and UV radiation. Somatic mosaics have been created in \"Drosophila\" using X‑ray treatment and the use of irradiation to induce somatic mutation has been a useful technique in the study of genetics.\n\nTrue mosaicism should not be mistaken for the phenomenon of X‑inactivation, where all cells in an organism have the same genotype, but a different copy of the X chromosome is expressed in different cells. The latter is the case in normal (XX) female mammals, although it is not always visible from the phenotype (like it is in calico cats). However, all multicellular organisms are likely to be somatic mosaics to some extent. \n\nSomatic mutation leading to mosaicism is prevalent in the beginning and end stages of human life. Somatic mosaics are common in embryogenesis due to retrotransposition of L1 and Alu transposable elements. In early development, DNA from undifferentiated cell types may be more susceptible to mobile element invasion due to long, un-methylated regions in the genome. Further, the accumulation of DNA copy errors and damage over a lifetime lead to greater occurrences of mosaic tissues in aging humans. As our longevity has increased dramatically over the last century, our genome may not have had time to adapt to cumulative effects of mutagenesis. Thus, cancer research has shown that somatic mutations are increasingly present throughout a lifetime and are responsible for most leukemia, lymphomas, and solid tumors.\n\nOne basic mechanism which can produce mosaic tissue is mitotic recombination or somatic crossover. It was first discovered by Curt Stern in \"Drosophila\" in 1936. The amount of tissue which is mosaic depends on where in the tree of cell division the exchange takes place. A phenotypic character called \"Twin Spot\" seen in Drosophila is a result of mitotic recombination. However, it also depends on the allelic status of the genes undergoing recombination. Twin spot occurs only if the heterozygous genes are linked in repulsion i.e. trans phase. The recombination needs to occur between the centromere the adjacent gene. This gives an appearance of yellow patches on the wild type background in Drosophila. another example of mitotic recombination is the Bloom's syndrome which happens due to the mutation in the \"blm\" gene. The resulting BLM protein is defective. the defect in RecQ an helicase facilitates the defective unwinding of DNA during replication and is thus associated with the occurrence of this disease.\n\nGermline or gonadal mosaicism is a special form of mosaicism, where some gametes—i.e., sperm or oocytes—carry a mutation, but the rest are normal.\n\nThe cause is usually a mutation that occurred in an early stem cell that gave rise to all or part of the gonadal tissue.\n\nThis can cause only some children to be affected, even for a dominant disease.\n\nGenetic mosaics can be extraordinarily useful in the study of biological systems, and can be created intentionally in many model organisms in a variety of ways. They often allow for the study of genes that are important for very early events in development, making it otherwise difficult to obtain adult organisms in which later effects would be apparent. Furthermore, they can be used to determine the tissue or cell type in which a given gene is required and to determine whether a gene is cell autonomous. That is, whether or not the gene acts solely within the cell of that genotype, or if it affects neighboring cells which do not themselves contain that genotype, but take on that phenotype due to environmental differentiation.\n\nThe earliest examples of this involved transplantation experiments (technically creating chimeras) where cells from a blastula stage embryo from one genetic background are aspirated out and injected into a blastula stage embryo of a different genetic background.\n\nGenetic mosaics are a particularly powerful tool when used in the commonly studied fruit fly, where specially-selected strains frequently lose an X or a Y chromosome in one of the first embryonic cell divisions. These mosaics can then be used to analyze such things as courtship behavior, female sex pheromones, and the autonomy or non-autonomy of particular genes.\n\nGenetic mosaics can also be created through mitotic recombination. Such mosaics were originally created by irradiating flies heterozygous for a particular allele with X-rays, inducing double-strand DNA breaks which, when repaired, could result in a cell homozygous for one of the two alleles. After further rounds of replication, this cell would result in a patch, or \"clone\" of cells mutant for the allele being studied.\n\nMore recently the use of a transgene incorporated into the \"Drosophila\" genome has made the system far more flexible. The Flip Recombinase (or FLP) is a gene from the commonly studied yeast \"Saccharomyces cerevisiae\" which recognizes \"Flip Recombinase Target\" (FRT) sites, which are short sequences of DNA, and induces recombination between them. FRT sites have been inserted transgenically near the centromere of each chromosome arm of \"Drosophila melanogaster\". The FLP gene can then be induced selectively, commonly using either the heat shock promoter or the GAL4/UAS system. The resulting clones can be identified either negatively or positively.\n\nIn negatively marked clones the fly is transheterozygous for a gene encoding a visible marker (commonly the green fluorescent protein or GFP) and an allele of a gene to be studied (both on chromosomes bearing FRT sites). After induction of FLP expression, cells that undergo recombination will have progeny that are homozygous for either the marker or the allele being studied. Therefore, the cells that do not carry the marker (which are dark) can be identified as carrying a mutation.\n\nIt is sometimes inconvenient to use negatively marked clones, especially when generating very small patches of cells, where it is more difficult to see a dark spot on a bright background than a bright spot on a dark background. It is possible to create positively marked clones using the so-called MARCM (\"Mosaic Analysis with a Repressible Cell Marker\", pronounced [mark-em]) system, developed by Liqun Luo, a professor at Stanford University, and his post-doc Tzumin Lee who now leads a group at Janelia Farm Research Campus. This system builds on the GAL4/UAS system, which is used to express GFP in specific cells. However a globally expressed GAL80 gene is used to repress the action of GAL4, preventing the expression of GFP. Instead of using GFP to mark the wild-type chromosome as above, GAL80 serves this purpose, so that when it is removed by mitotic recombination, GAL4 is allowed to function, and GFP turns on. This results in the cells of interest being marked brightly in a dark background.\n\nIn 1929, Alfred Sturtevant studied mosaicism in Drosophila. A few years later, In the 1930s, Curt Stern demonstrated that genetic recombination, normal in meiosis, can also take place in mitosis. When it does, it results in somatic (body) mosaics. These are organisms which contain two or more genetically distinct types of tissue. The term \"somatic mosaicism\" was used by C. W. Cotterman in 1956 in his seminal paper on antigenic variation.\n\n", "id": "604020", "title": "Mosaic (genetics)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1502597", "text": "Dosage compensation\n\nDosage compensation is the process by which organisms equalize the expression of genes between members of different biological sexes. Across species, different sexes are often characterized by different types and numbers of sex chromosomes. In order to account for varying numbers of sex chromosomes, different organisms have acquired unique methods to equalize gene expression amongst the sexes. Because sex chromosomes contain different numbers of genes, different species of organisms have developed different mechanisms to cope with this inequality. Replicating the actual \"gene\" is impossible; thus organisms instead equalize the \"expression\" from each gene. For example, in humans, females (XX) silence the transcription of one X chromosome of each pair, and transcribe all information from the other, expressed X chromosome. Thus, human females have the same number of expressed X-linked genes as do human males (XY), both sexes having essentially one X chromosome per cell, from which to transcribe and express genes.\n\nThere are three main mechanisms of achieving dosage compensation which are widely documented in the literature and which are common to most species. These include random inactivation of one female X chromosome (as observed in \"Mus musculus\"), a two-fold increase in the transcription of a single male X chromosome (as observed in \"Drosophila melanogaster\"), and decreased transcription by half in both of the X chromosomes of a hermaphroditic organism (as observed in \"Caenorhabditis elegans\"). These mechanisms have been widely studied and manipulated in model organisms commonly used in the laboratory research setting. A summary of these forms of dosage compensation is illustrated below. However, there are also other less common forms of dosage compensation, which are not as widely researched and are sometimes specific to only one species (as observed in certain bird and monotreme species).\n\nOne logical way to equalize gene expression amongst males and females that follow a XX/XY sex differentiation scheme would be to decrease or altogether eliminate the expression of one of the X chromosomes in an XX, or female, homogametic individual, such that both males and females then express only one X chromosome. This is the case in many mammalian organisms, including humans and mice.\n\nThe evidence for this mechanism of dosage compensation was discovered prior to scientists’ understanding of what its implications were. In 1949, Murray Barr and Ewert Bertram published data describing the presence of “nucleolar satellites, which they observed were present in the mature somatic tissue of different female species. Further characterization of these satellites revealed that they were actually packages of condensed heterochromatin, but a decade would pass before scientists grasped the significance of this specialized DNA.\n\nThen, in 1959 Susumu Ohno proved that these satellite-like structures found exclusively in female cells were actually derived from female X chromosomes. He called these structures Barr bodies after one of the investigators who originally documented their existence. Ohno’s studies of Barr bodies in female mammals with multiple X chromosomes revealed that such females used Barr bodies to inactivate all but one of their X chromosomes. Thus, Ohno described the “n-1” rule to predict the number of Barr bodies in a female with n number of X chromosomes in her karyotype.\n\nSimultaneously, Mary F. Lyon began investigating manipulations of X-linked traits that had phenotypically visible consequences, particularly in mice, whose fur color is a trait intimately linked to the X chromosome. Building on work done by Ohno and his colleagues, Lyon eventually proved that either the maternal or paternal X chromosome is randomly inactivated in every cell of the female body in the species she was studying, which explained the heterogeneous fur patterns she observed in her mosaic mice. This process is known as X-inactivation, and is sometimes referred to as “lyonization”. This discovery can be easily extrapolated to explain the mixed color patterns observed in the coats of tortoiseshell cats. The fur patterns characteristic of tortoiseshell cats are found almost exclusively in females, because only they randomly inactivate one X chromosome in every somatic hair cell. Thus, presuming that hair color determining genes are X-linked, it makes sense that whether the maternal or paternal X chromosome is inactivated in a particular hair cell can result in differential fur color expression.\n\nCompounding on Lyon’s discoveries, in 1962 Ernest Beutler used female fibroblast cell lineages grown in culture to demonstrate the heritability of lyonization or random X-inactivation. By analyzing the differential expression of two existing, viable alleles for the X-linked enzyme glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) gene, Beutler observed that the inactivation of the gene was heritable across passaged generations of the cells.\n\nThis pattern of dosage compensation, caused by random X-inactivation, is regulated across development in female mammals, following concerted patterns throughout development; for example, at the beginning of most female mammal development, both X chromosomes are initially expressed, but gradually undergo epigenetic processes to eventually achieve random inactivation of one X. In germ cells, inactivated X chromosomes are then once again activated to ensure their expression in gametes produced by female mammals.\n\nThus, dosage compensation in mammals is largely achieved through the silencing of one of two female X chromosomes via X-inactivation. This process involves histone tail modifications, DNA methylation patterns, and reorganization of large-scale chromatin structure encoded by the X-ist gene. In spite of these extensive modifications, not all genes along the X chromosome are subject to X-inactivation; active expression at some loci is required for homologous recombination with the pseudo-autosomal region (PAR) of the Y chromosome during meiosis. Additionally, 10-25% of human X chromosome genes, and 3-7% of mouse X chromosome genes outside of the PARs show weak expression from the inactive X chromosome.\n\nAnother mechanism common for achieving equal X-related genetic expression between males and females involves two-fold increased transcription of a single male X chromosome. Thus, heterogametic male organisms with one X chromosome may match the level of expression achieved in homogametic females with two active X chromosomes. This mechanism is observed in \"Drosophila\".\n\nThe concept of dosage compensation actually originated from an understanding of organisms in which males upregulated X-linked genes two-fold, and was much later extended to account for the observation of the once mysterious Barr bodies. As early as 1932, H.J. Muller carried out a set of experiments which allowed him to track the expression of eye color in flies, which is an X-linked gene. Muller introduced a mutant gene that caused loss of pigmentation in fly eyes, and subsequently noted that males with only one copy of the mutant gene had similar pigmentation to females with two copies of the mutant gene. This led Muller to coin the phrase “dosage compensation” to describe the observed phenomenon of gene expression equalization.\n\nDespite these advances, it was not until Ardhendu Mukherjee and W. Beermann performed more advanced autoradiography experiments in 1965 that scientists could confirm that transcription of genes in the single male X chromosome was double that observed in the two female X chromosomes. Mukherjee and Beermann confirmed this by designing a cellular autoradiography experiment that allowed them to visualize incorporation of [3H]uridine into ribonucleic acid of the X chromosomes. Their studies showed equal levels of [3H]uridine incorporation in the single male X chromosome and the two female X chromosomes. Thus, the investigators concluded that the two-fold increase in the rate of RNA synthesis in the X chromosome of the male relative to those of the female could account for Muller’s hypothesized dosage compensation.\n\nIn the case of two-fold increased transcription of a single male X chromosome, there is no use for a Barr body, and the male organism must use different genetic machinery to increase the transcriptional output of their single X chromosome. It is common in such organisms for the Y chromosome to be necessary for male fertility, but not for it to play an explicit role in sex determination. In \"Drosophila\", for example, the sex lethal (SXL) gene acts as a key regulator of sexual differentiation and maturation in somatic tissue; in XX animals, SXL is activated to repress increased transcription, while in XY animals SXL is inactive and allows male development to proceed via increased transcription of the single X. Several binding sites exist on the \"Drosophila\" X chromosome for the dosage compensation complex (DCC), a ribonucleoprotein complex; these binding sites have varying levels of affinity, presumably for varying expression of specific genes. The Male Specific Lethal complex, composed of protein and RNA binds and selectively modifies hundreds of X-linked genes, increasing their transcription to levels comparable to female \"D. melanogaster\".\n\nIn organisms that use this method of dosage compensation, the presence of one or more X chromosomes must be detected early on in development, as failure to initiate the appropriate dosage compensation mechanisms is lethal. Male specific lethal proteins (MSLs) are a family of four proteins that bind to the X chromosome exclusively in males. The name “MSL” is used because mutations in these genes cause inability to effectively upregulate X-linked genes appropriately, and are thus lethal to males only and not their female counterparts. SXL regulates pre-messenger RNA in males to differentially splice MSLs and result in the appropriate increase in X chromosome transcription observed in male \"Drosophila\". The immediate target of SXL is male specific lethal-2 (MSL-2). Current dogma suggests that the binding of MSL-2 at multiple sites along the SXL gene in females prevents proper MSL-2 translation, and thus, as previously stated, represses the possibility for X-linked genetic upregulation in females. However, all other transcription factors in the MSL family—maleless, MSL-1, and MSL-3—are able to act when SXL is not expressed, as in the case in males. These factors act to increase male X chromosome transcriptional activity. Histone acetylation and the consequent upregulation of X-linked genes in males is dictated by the MSL complex. Specifically, special roX non-coding RNAs on the MSL complexes facilitate binding to the single male X chromosome, and dictate acetylation of specific loci along the X chromosome as well as the formation of euchromatin. Though these RNAs bind at specific sites along the male X chromosome, their effects spread along the length of the chromosome and have the ability to influence large-scale chromatin modifications. The implications of this spreading epigenetic regulation along the male X chromosome is thought to have implications for understanding the transfer of epigenetic activity along long genomic stretches.\n\nOther species that do not follow the previously discussed conventions of XX females and XY males must find alternative ways to equalize X-linked gene expression among differing sexes. For example, in \"Caenorhabditis elegans\" (or \"C. elegans\"), sex is determined by the ratio of X chromosomes relative to autosomes; worms with two X chromosomes (XX worms) develop as hermaphrodites, whereas those with only one X chromosome (XO worms) develop as males. This system of sex determination is unique, because there is no male specific chromosome, as is the case in XX/XY sex determination systems. However, as is the case with the previously discussed mechanisms of dosage compensation, failure to express X-linked genes appropriately can still be lethal.\n\nIn this XX/XO sex determination system, gene expression on the X chromosome is equalized by downregulating expression of genes on both X chromosomes of hermaphroditic XX organisms by half. In these XX organisms, the dosage compensation complex (DCC) is assembled on both X chromosomes to allow for this tightly regulated change in transcription levels. The DCC is often compared to the condensin complex, which is conserved across the mitotic and meiotic processes of many species. This complex is crucial to the condensation and segregation of chromosomes during both meiosis and mitosis. Because data substantiates the theory that dosage compensation in other species is caused by chromatin-wide modifications, many theorize that the DCC in particular functions similar to the condensin complex in its ability to condense or remodel the chromatin of the X chromosome.\n\nThe role of the DCC in this form of dosage compensation was postulated by Barbara J. Meyer in the 1980s, and its individual components and their cooperative function were later parsed out by her lab. Notably, in 1999, data from Meyer’s lab showed that SDC-2 is a particularly important transcriptional factor for targeting the DCC to the X chromosome and for assembling DCC components onto the X chromosomes in XX embryos. More recently, Meyer’s lab has shown that proteins known as X-linked signal elements (XSEs) operate in concert with SDC-2 to differentially repress and activate other genes in the dosage compensation pathway. By selectively mutating a panel of genes hypothesized to contribute to dosage compensation in worms, Meyer’s group demonstrated which XSEs specifically play a role in determining normal dosage compensation. They found that during embryonic development, several X-linked genes—including sex-1, sex-2, fox-1, and ceh-39—act in a combinatorial fashion to selectively repress transcriptional activity of the xol-1 gene in hermaphrodites. Xol-1 expression is tightly regulated during early development, and is considered the most upstream gene in sex determination of C. elegans. In fact, xol-1 is often referred to in the literature as the master sex regulatory gene of C. elegans. XX C. elegans embryos have much lower xol-1 expression than their XO counterparts, resulting from overall increases in the amount of SEX-1, SEX-2, CEH-39, and FOX-1 transcription produced in the female embryos. This consequent decrease in xol-1 expression then allows higher SDC-2 expression levels, which aids in the formation and function of the DCC complex in the XX hermaphroditic worms, and in turn results in equalized expression of X-linked genes in the hermaphrodite.\n\nThough all of the above mentioned XSEs act to reduce xol-1 expression, experimentally reducing expression levels of these individual XSEs has been shown to have a minimal effect on sex determination and successful dosage compensation. This could be in part because these genes encode different proteins that act cooperatively rather than in an isolated fashion; for example, SEX-1 is a nuclear hormone receptor, while FOX-1 is an RNA-binding protein with properties capable of inducing post-transcriptional modifications in the xol-1 target. However, reducing the level of more than one XSE in different combinational permutations seems to have an additive effect on ensuring proper sex determination and resultant dosage compensation mechanics. This supports the hypothesis that these XSEs act together to achieve the desired sex determination and dosage compensation fate. Thus, in this model organism, the achieved level of X-chromosome expression is directly correlated to the activation of multiple XSEs that ultimately function to repress xol-1 expression in a developing worm embryo. A summary of this \"C. elegans\" mechanism of dosage compensation is illustrated below.\n\nThe ZZ/ZW sex system is used by most birds, as well as some reptiles and insects. In this system the Z is the larger chromosome so the males (ZZ) must silence some genetic material to compensate for the female’s (ZW) smaller W chromosome. Instead of silencing the entire chromosome as humans do, male chickens (the model ZZ organism) seem to engage in selective Z silencing, in which they silence only certain genes on the extra Z chromosome. Thus, male chickens express an average of 1.4-1.6 of the Z chromosome DNA expressed by female chickens. The Z chromosome expression of male zebra finches and chickens is higher than the autosomal expression rates, whereas X chromosome expression in female humans is equal to autosomal expression rates, illustrating clearly that both male chickens and male zebra finches practice incomplete silencing. Few other ZZ/ZW Systems have been analyzed as thoroughly as the chicken; however a recent study on silkworms revealed similar levels of unequal compensation across male Z chromosomes. Z-specific genes were over-expressed in males when compared to females, and a few genes had equal expression in both male and female Z chromosomes.\n\nIn chickens, most of the dosage compensated genes exist on the Zp, or short, arm of the chromosome while the non-compensated genes are on the Zq, or long, arm of the chromosome. The compensated (silenced) genes on Zp resemble a region on the primitive platypus sex chromosome, suggesting an ancestor to the XX/XY system.\n\nThe sex chromosomes of birds evolved separately from those of mammals and share very little sequence homology with the XY chromosomes. As such, scientists refer to bird sex chromosomes as a ZW sex-determining system, with males possessing two Z chromosomes, and females possessing one Z chromosome and one W. Thus, dosage compensation in birds could be hypothesized to follow a pattern similar to the random X-inactivation observed in most mammals. Alternatively, birds might show decreased transcription of the two Z chromosomes present in the male heterogametic sex, similar to the system observed in the two male X chromosomes of \"Drosophila\". However, bird mechanisms of dosage compensation differ significantly from these precedents. Instead, male birds appear to selectively silence only a few genes along one of their Z chromosomes, rather than randomly silencing one entire Z chromosome. This type of selective silencing has led some people to label birds as “less effective” at dosage compensation than mammals. However, more recent studies have shown that those genes on the Z chromosome which are not inactivated in birds may play an important role in recruiting dosage compensation machinery to the Z chromosome in ZZ organisms. In particular, one of these genes, ScII has been demonstrated to be an ortholog of xol-1, the master sex regulator gene in C. elegans. Thus, the function of the selective silencing may be to spare dosage compensation of genes crucial for sex determination of homologous pairing.\n\nWhile the epigenetic mechanisms behind dosage compensation in birds are poorly understood, especially in comparison to the well-studied mechanisms of dosage compensation in humans and \"Drosophila\", several recent studies have revealed promising sequences. One example is MHM (male hypermethylated) RNA, an Xist-like long noncoding RNA that is expressed only in female chickens (ZW). It is associated with female-specific hyper-acetylation of lysine 16 on histone 4 near the MHM locus on the Z chromosome. This MHM locus is heavily studied as a site of dosage compensation because male Z chromosomes are hypermethylated and thus underexpress genes in this area in comparison to female Z chromosomes which are hyperacetylated and overexpress these genes. There has been debate on whether the MHM locus constitutes dosage compensation, however, since scientists claim that even if the MHM locus has been found to have significantly greater expression in females than in males, it could not even be considered to be a dosage compensation mechanism since it does not balance gene dose between the Z chromosome and autosomes in the heterogametic sex.\n\nSimilar to mammals, chickens seem to use CpG islands (segments of Cytosine-phosphate-Guanine that are more readily methylated and silenced than other DNA segments) to regulate gene expression. One study found that CpG islands were found primarily in compensated areas of the Z chromosome—areas that are differentially expressed in male and female chickens. Thus it is likely that these CpG islands are locations where genes on the male Z chromosome are methylated and silenced, but which stay functional on the female Z chromosome.\n\nMonotremes are a class of basal mammals that also lay eggs. They are an order of mammals that includes platypuses and four species of echidna, all of which are egg-laying mammals. While monotremes use an XX/XY system, unlike other mammals, monotremes have more than two sex chromosomes. The male short-beaked echidna, for example, has nine sex chromosomes—5 Xs and 4 Ys, and the male platypus has 5 Xs and 5 Ys.\n\nPlatypuses are a monotreme species whose mechanism of sex determination has been extensively studied. There is some contention in academia about the evolutionary origin and the proper taxonomy of platypuses. A recent study revealed that four platypus X chromosomes, as well as a Y chromosome, are homologous to some regions on the avian Z chromosome. Specifically, platypus X1 shares homology with the chicken Z chromosome, and both share homology with the human chromosome 9. This homology is important when considering the mechanism of dosage compensation in monotremes. In 50% of female platypus cells, only one of the alleles on these X chromosomes is expressed while in the remaining 50% multiple alleles are expressed. This, combined with the portions that are homologous to chicken Z and human 9 chromosomes imply that this level of incomplete silencing may be the ancestral form of dosage compensation.\n\nRegardless of their ambiguous evolutionary history, platypuses have been empirically determined to follow an XY sex-determination system, with females possessing five pairs of X chromosomes as the homogametic sex, and males possessing five X and five Y chromosomes as the heterogametic sex. Because the entire genome of the platypus has yet to be completely sequenced (including one of the X chromosomes), there is still continued investigation as to the definitive mechanism of dosage compensation that Platypuses follow. Research from the laboratory of Jennifer Graves used qPCR and SNP analysis of BACs containing various genes from X chromosomes in order to find whether multiple alleles for particular X-linked genes were being expressed at once, or were otherwise being dosage compensated. Her group found that in female platypuses, some X-linked genes only expressed an allele from one X chromosomes, while other genes expressed multiple alleles. This appears to be a system similar to the selective silencing method of dosage compensation observed in birds. However, about half of all X-linked genes also seemed to stochastically express only one active copy of said gene, alluding to the system of random X-inactivation observed in humans. These findings suggest that platypuses may employ a hybrid form of dosage compensation that combines feature from mammals as well as birds. Understanding the evolution of such a system may have implications for solidifying the true ancestral lineage of monotremes.\n\nIn addition to humans and flies, some plants also make use of the XX/XY dosage compensation systems. \"Silene latifolia\" plants are also either male (XY) or female (XX), with the Y chromosome being smaller, with fewer genes expressed, than the X chromosome. Two separate studies have shown male \"S. latifolia\" expression of X-linked genes to be about 70% of the expression in females. If the \"S. latifolia\" did not practice dosage compensation, the expected level of X-linked gene expression in males would be 50% that of females, thus the plant practices some degree of dosage compensation but, because male expression is not 100% that of females, it has been suggested that \"S. latiforia\" and its dosage compensation system is still evolving. Additionally, in plant species that lack dimorphic sex chromosomes, dosage compensation can occur when aberrant meiotic events or mutations result in either aneuploidy or polyploidy. Genes on the affected chromosome may be upregulated or down-regulated to compensate for the change in the normal number of chromosomes present.\n\n\n", "id": "1502597", "title": "Dosage compensation"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1795228", "text": "Pronucleus\n\nA pronucleus (plural: pronuclei) is the nucleus of a sperm or an egg cell during the process of fertilization, after the sperm enters the ovum, but before the genetic material of the sperm and egg fuse. Sperm and egg cells are haploid, meaning they carry half the number of chromosomes of somatic cells. The male and female pronuclei don't fuse, although their genetic material does. Instead, their membranes dissolve, leaving no barriers between the male and female chromosomes. Their chromosomes can then combine and become part of a single diploid nucleus in the resulting embryo, containing a full set of chromosomes.\n\nThe appearance of two pronuclei is the first sign of successful fertilization as observed during in vitro fertilisation, and is usually observed 18 hours after insemination or ICSI. The zygote is then termed a \"two-pronuclear zygote\" (2PN). Two-pronuclear zygotes transitioning through 1PN or 3PN states tend to develop into poorer-quality embryos than ones who remain 2PN throughout development, and may be significant in embryo selection in IVF.\n", "id": "1795228", "title": "Pronucleus"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1822243", "text": "Fusion gene\n\nA fusion gene is a hybrid gene formed from two previously separate genes. It can occur as a result of: translocation, interstitial deletion, or chromosomal inversion.\n\nThe first fusion gene was described in cancer cells in the early 1980s. The finding was based on the discovery in 1960 by Peter Nowell and David Hungerford in Philadelphia of a small abnormal marker chromosome in patients with chronic myeloid leukemia—the first consistent chromosome abnormality detected in a human malignancy, later designated the Philadelphia chromosome. In 1973, Janet Rowley in Chicago showed that the Philadelphia chromosome had originated through a translocation between chromosomes 9 and 22, and not through a simple deletion of chromosome 22 as was previously thought. Several investigators in the early 1980s showed that the Philadelphia chromosome translocation led to the formation of a new BCR/ABL1 fusion gene, composed of the 3' part of the ABL1 gene in the breakpoint on chromosome 9 and the 5' part of a gene called BCR in the breakpoint in chromosome 22. In 1985 it was clearly established that the fusion gene on chromosome 22 produced an abnormal chimeric BCR/ABL1 protein with the capacity to induce chronic myeloid leukemia.\n\nAt present, scientists have identified 10,652 gene fusions. These genes have been found in practically all main subtypes of human neoplasia. The identification of these fusion genes play a prominent role in being a diagnostic and prognostic marker.\n\nIt has been known for 30 years that the corresponding gene fusion plays an important role in tumorgenesis. Fusion genes can contribute to tumor formation because fusion genes can produce much more active abnormal protein than non-fusion genes. Often, fusion genes are oncogenes that cause cancer; these include BCR-ABL, TEL-AML1 (ALL with t(12 ; 21)), AML1-ETO (M2 AML with t(8 ; 21)), and TMPRSS2-ERG with an interstitial deletion on chromosome 21, often occurring in prostate cancer. \nIn the case of TMPRSS2-ERG, by disrupting androgen receptor (AR) signaling and inhibiting AR expression by oncogenic ETS transcription factor, the fusion product regulates the prostate cancer. \nMost fusion genes are found from hematological cancers, sarcomas, and prostate cancer.\nBCAM-AKT2 is a fusion gene that is specific and unique to high-grade serous ovarian cancer.\n\nOncogenic fusion genes may lead to a gene product with a new or different function from the two fusion partners. Alternatively, a proto-oncogene is fused to a strong promoter, and thereby the oncogenic function is set to function by an upregulation caused by the strong promoter of the upstream fusion partner. The latter is common in lymphomas, where oncogenes are juxtaposed to the promoters of the immunoglobulin genes. Oncogenic fusion transcripts may also be caused by trans-splicing or read-through events.\n\nSince chromosomal translocations play such a significant role in neoplasia, a specialized database of chromosomal aberrations and gene fusions in cancer has been created. This database is called Mitelman Database of Chromosome Aberrations and Gene Fusions in Cancer.\n\nPresence of certain chromosomal aberrations and their resulting fusion genes is commonly used within cancer diagnostics in order to set a precise diagnosis. Chromosome banding analysis, fluorescence \"in situ\" hybridization (FISH), and reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) are common methods employed at diagnostic laboratories. These methods all have their distinct shortcomings due to the very complex nature of cancer genomes. Recent developments such as high-throughput sequencing and custom DNA microarrays bear promise of introduction of more efficient methods.\n\nGene fusion plays a key role in the evolution of gene architecture. We can observe its effect if gene fusion occurs in coding sequences. Duplication, sequence divergence, and recombination are the major contributors at work in gene evolution. These events can probably produce new genes from already existing parts. When gene fusion happens in non-coding sequence region, it can lead to the misregulation of the expression of a gene now under the control of the cis-regulatory sequence of another gene. If it happens in coding sequences, gene fusion cause the assembly of a new gene, then it allows the appearance of new functions by adding peptide modules into multi domain protein. The detecting methods to inventory gene fusion events on a large biological scale can provide insights about the multi modular architecture of proteins.\n\nIn recent years, next generation sequencing technology has already become available to screen known and novel gene fusion events on a genome wide scale. However, the precondition for large scale detection is a paired-end sequencing of the cell's transcriptome. The direction of fusion gene detection is mainly towards data analysis and visualization. Some researchers already developed a new tool called Transcriptome Viewer (TViewer) to directly visualize detected gene fusions on the transcript level.\n\nBiologists may also deliberately create fusion genes for research purposes. The fusion of reporter genes to the regulatory elements of genes of interest allows researches to study gene expression. Reporter gene fusions can be used to measure activity levels of gene regulators, identify the regulatory sites of genes (including the signals required), identify various genes that are regulated in response to the same stimulus, and artificially control the expression of desired genes in particular cells. For example, by creating a fusion gene of a protein of interest and green fluorescent protein, the protein of interest may be observed in cells or tissue using fluorescence microscopy. The protein synthesized when a fusion gene is expressed is called a \"fusion protein\".\n\n\n", "id": "1822243", "title": "Fusion gene"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1431111", "text": "Bookmarking\n\nBookmarking (also \"gene bookmarking\" or \"mitotic bookmarking\") refers to a potential mechanism of transmission of gene expression programs through cell division.\n\nDuring mitosis, gene transcription is silenced and most transcription factors are removed from chromatin. The term bookmarking compares transcription to reading from a book. The pause in transcription during mitosis is like closing the book. \"Molecular bookmarks\" are the factors that allow transcription to resume in an orderly fashion in newborn cells following mitosis (when the book is re-opened).\n\nBookmarks fulfill the following criteria:\n\n\nThe term bookmarking was originally coined to describe the non-compaction of some gene promoters during mitosis. More recently genome accessibility during interphase and mitosis has been directly compared on a genome-wide scale. While gene promoters tend to be better preserved than distal regulatory elements, substantial variation exists at individual sites.\n\nSome patterns of histone modification and the presence of some histone variants on DNA remain unchanged during mitosis and have the potential to act as bookmarks. Patters of DNA methylation are generally unchanged and also have the potential to function as bookmarks.\n\nNotable transcription factors implicated in mitotic bookmarking include:\n\n", "id": "1431111", "title": "Bookmarking"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1877510", "text": "Multiple cloning site\n\nA multiple cloning site (MCS), also called a polylinker, is a short segment of DNA which contains many (up to ~20) restriction sites - a standard feature of engineered plasmids. Restriction sites within an MCS are typically unique, occurring only once within a given plasmid. MCSs are commonly used during procedures involving molecular cloning or subcloning. Extremely useful in biotechnology, bioengineering, and molecular genetics, MCSs let a molecular biologist insert a piece of DNA or several pieces of DNA into the region of the MCS. This can be used to create transgenic organisms, also known as genetically modified organisms (GMOs).\n\nOne bacterial plasmid used in genetic engineering as a plasmid cloning vector is pUC18. Its polylinker region is composed of several restriction enzyme recognition sites, that have been engineered into a single cluster (the polylinker). It has restriction sites for various restriction enzymes, including EcoRI, BamHI and PstI. Another vector used in genetic engineering is pUC19, which is similar to pUC18, but its polylinker region is reversed.\n", "id": "1877510", "title": "Multiple cloning site"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1929037", "text": "Haploinsufficiency\n\nHaploinsufficiency is a mechanism of action to explain a phenotype when a diploid organism has lost one copy of a gene and is left with a single functional copy of that gene. Haploinsufficiency is often caused by a loss-of-function mutation, in which having only one copy of the wild-type allele is not sufficient to produce the wild-type phenotype. It occurs when an organism has a single functional copy of a gene, and that single copy does not produce enough product to display the wild type's phenotypic characteristics. The genotypic state in which one of two copies of a gene is absent is called hemizygosity. Hemizygosity is not the same as haploinsufficiency; hemizygosity describes the genotype, and haploinsufficiency is a mechanism that may have caused the phenotype. The general assumption is that the single remaining functional copy of the gene cannot provide sufficient gene product (typically a protein) to preserve the wild-type phenotype leading to an altered or even diseased state. As such, haploinsuffiency is typically transmitted with dominant inheritance, either autosomally or X-linked in female humans. \n\nDominance describes the circumstance in which both alleles in a diploid organism are present but one allele is responsible for the phenotype. That genotypic state is one of heterozygosity (with two different alleles). Co-Dominance is that situation where the effects of both alleles are apparent in the phenotype.\n\nHaploinsufficiency can occur through a number of ways. A mutation in the gene may have erased the production message. One of the two copies of the gene may be missing due to a deletion. The message or protein produced by the cell may be unstable or degraded by the cell.\n\nA haploinsufficient gene is described as needing both alleles to be functional in order to express the wild type. A mutation is not haploinsufficient, but dominant loss of function mutations are the result of mutations in haploinsufficient genes.\n\nThe alteration in the gene dosage, which is caused by the loss of a functional allele, is also called allelic insufficiency. An example of this is seen in the case of Williams syndrome, a neurodevelopmental disorder caused by the haploinsufficiency of genes at 7q11.23. The haploinsufficiency is caused by the copy-number variation (CNV) of 28 genes led by the deletion of ~1.6 Mb. These dosage-sensitive genes are vital for human language and constructive cognition.\n\nAnother example is the haploinsufficiency of telomerase reverse transcriptase which leads to anticipation in autosomal dominant dyskeratosis congenita. It is a rare inherited disorder characterized by abnormal skin manifestations, which results in bone marrow failure, pulmonary fibrosis and an increased predisposition to cancer. A null mutation in motif D of the reverse transcriptase domain of the telomerase protein, hTERT, leads to this phenotype. Thus telomerase dosage is important for maintaining tissue proliferation.\n\nA variation of haploinsufficiency exists for mutations in the gene \"PRPF31\", a known cause of autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa. There are two wild-type alleles of this gene—a high-expressivity allele and a low-expressivity allele. When the mutant gene is inherited with a high-expressivity allele, there is no disease phenotype. However, if a mutant allele and a low-expressivity allele are inherited, the residual protein levels falls below that required for normal function, and disease phenotype is present.\n\nCopy-number variation (CNV) refers to the differences in the number of copies of a particular region of the genome. This leads to too many or too few of the dosage sensitive genes. The genomic rearrangements, that is, deletions or duplications, are caused by the mechanism of non-allelic homologous recombination (NAHR). In the case of the Williams Syndrome, the microdeletion includes the \"ELN\" gene. The hemizygosity of the elastinis is responsible for supravalvular aortic stenosis, the obstruction in the left ventricular outflow of blood in the heart. \n\nThese include:\n\n", "id": "1929037", "title": "Haploinsufficiency"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1951392", "text": "Orphon\n\nAn orphon is a gene located outside the main chromosomal locus.\n", "id": "1951392", "title": "Orphon"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1612722", "text": "Index of genetics articles\n\nGenetics (from Ancient Greek ', “genite” and that from ', “origin”), a discipline of biology, is the science of heredity and variation in living organisms.\n\nArticles (arranged alphabetically) related to genetics include:\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n", "id": "1612722", "title": "Index of genetics articles"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1505283", "text": "Pleiotropy\n\nPleiotropy (from Greek πλείων \"pleion\", \"more\", and τρόπος \"tropos\", \"way\") occurs when one gene influences two or more seemingly unrelated phenotypic traits. Therefore, a mutation in a pleiotropic gene may have an effect on several traits simultaneously due to the gene coding for a product used by a myriad of cells or different targets that have the same signaling function.\n\nPleiotropy can arise from several distinct but potentially overlapping mechanisms, such as gene pleiotropy, developmental pleiotropy, and selectional pleiotropy. Gene pleiotropy occurs when a gene product interacts with multiple other proteins or catalyzes multiple reactions. Developmental pleiotropy occurs when mutations have multiple effects on the resulting phenotype. Selectional pleiotropy occurs when the resulting phenotype has many effects on fitness (depending on factors such as age and gender).\n\nAn example of pleiotropy is phenylketonuria, an inherited disorder that affects the level of phenylalanine in the body. Phenylalanine is an amino acid that can be obtained from food. Phenylketonuria causes this amino acid to increase in amount in the body, which can be very dangerous. The human disease is caused by a defect in a single gene on chromosome 12 that affects multiple systems, such as the nervous and integumentary system. Other examples of pleiotropy are albinism, sickle cell anemia, and certain forms of autism and schizophrenia. Pleiotropy not only affects humans, but also animals, such as chickens and laboratory house mice, where the mice have the \"mini-muscle\" allele.\n\nPleiotropic gene action can limit the rate of multivariate evolution when natural selection, sexual selection or artificial selection on one trait favors one allele, while selection on other traits favors a different allele. Some gene evolution is harmful to an organism. Genetic correlations and responses to selection most often exemplify pleiotropy.\n\nPleiotropic traits had been previously recognized in the scientific community but had not been experimented on until Gregor Mendel's 1866 pea plant experiment. Mendel recognized that certain pea plant traits (seed coat color, flower color, and axial spots) seemed to be inherited together; however, their correlation to a single gene has never been proven. The term \"pleiotropie\" was first coined by Ludwig Plate in his Festschrift, which was published in 1910. He originally defined pleiotropy as occurring when \"several characteristics are dependent upon ... [inheritance]; these characteristics will then always appear together and may thus appear correlated\". This definition is still used today.\n\nAfter Plate's definition, Hans Gruneberg was the first to study the mechanisms of pleiotropy. In 1938 Gruneberg published an article dividing pleiotropy into two distinct types: \"genuine\" and \"spurious\" pleiotropy. \"Genuine\" pleiotropy is when two distinct primary products arise from one locus. \"Spurious\" pleiotropy, on the other hand, is either when one primary product is utilized in different ways or when one primary product initiates a cascade of events with different phenotypic consequences. Gruneberg came to these distinctions after experimenting on rats with skeletal mutations. He recognized that \"spurious\" pleiotropy was present in the mutation, while \"genuine\" pleiotropy was not, thus partially invalidating his own original theory. Through subsequent research, it has been established that Gruneberg's definition of \"spurious\" pleiotropy is what we now identify simply as \"pleiotropy\".\n\nIn 1941 American geneticists George Beadle and Edward Tatum further invalidated Gruneberg's definition of \"genuine\" pleiotropy, advocating instead for the \"one gene-one enzyme\" hypothesis that was originally introduced by French biologist Lucien Cuénot in 1903. This hypothesis shifted future research regarding pleiotropy towards how a single gene can produce various phenotypes.\n\nIn the mid-1950s Richard Goldschmidt and Ernst Hadorn, through separate individual research, reinforced the faultiness of \"genuine\" pleiotropy. A few years later, Hadorn partitioned pleiotropy into a \"mosaic\" model (which states that one locus directly affects two phenotypic traits) and a \"relational\" model (which is analogous to \"spurious\" pleiotropy). These terms are no longer in use but have contributed to the current understanding of pleiotropy.\n\nBy accepting the one gene-one enzyme hypothesis, scientists instead focused on how uncoupled phenotypic traits can be affected by genetic recombination and mutations, applying it to populations and evolution. This view of pleiotropy, \"universal pleiotropy\", defined as locus mutations being capable of affecting essentially all traits, was first implied by Ronald Fisher's Geometric Model in 1930. This mathematical model illustrates how evolutionary fitness depends on the independence of phenotypic variation from random changes (that is, mutations). It theorizes that an increasing phenotypic independence corresponds to a decrease in the likelihood that a given mutation will result in an increase in fitness. Expanding on Fisher's work, Sewall Wright provided more evidence in his 1968 book \"Evolution and the Genetics of Populations: Genetic and Biometric Foundations\" by using molecular genetics to support the idea of \"universal pleiotropy\". The concepts of these various studies on evolution have seeded numerous other research projects relating to individual fitness.\n\nIn 1957 evolutionary biologist George C. Williams theorized that antagonistic effects will be exhibited during an organism's life cycle if it is closely linked and pleiotropic. Natural selection favors genes that are more beneficial prior to reproduction than after (leading to an increase in reproductive success). Knowing this, Williams argued that if only close linkage was present, then beneficial traits will occur both before and after reproduction due to natural selection. This, however, is not observed in nature, and thus antagonistic pleiotropy contributes to the slow deterioration with age (senescence).\n\nPleiotropy describes the genetic effect of a single gene on multiple phenotypic traits. The underlying mechanism is genes that code for a product that is either used by various cells or has a cascade-like signaling function that affects various targets.\n\nOne basic model of pleiotropy's origin describes a single gene locus to the expression of a certain trait. The locus affects the expressed trait only through changing the expression of other loci. Over time, that locus would affect two traits by interacting with a second locus. Directional selection for both traits during the same time period would increase the positive correlation between the traits, while selection on only one trait would decrease the positive correlation between the two traits. Eventually, traits that underwent directional selection simultaneously were linked by a single gene, resulting in pleiotropy.\n\nOther more complex models compensate for some of the basic model's oversights, such as multiple traits or assumptions about how the loci affect the traits. They also propose the idea that pleiotropy increases the phenotypic variation of both traits since a single mutation on a gene would have twice the effect.\n\nPleiotropy can have an effect on the evolutionary rate of genes and allele frequencies. Traditionally, models of pleiotropy have predicted that evolutionary rate of genes is related negatively with pleiotropyas the number of traits of an organism increases, the evolutionary rates of genes in the organism's population decrease. However, this relationship has not been clearly found in empirical studies.\n\nIn mating, for many animals the signals and receptors of sexual communication may have evolved simultaneously as the expression of a single gene, instead of the result of selection on two independent genes, one that affects the signaling trait and one that affects the receptor trait. In such a case, pleiotropy would facilitate mating and survival. However, pleiotropy can act negatively as well. A study on seed beetles found that intralocus sexual conflict arises when selection for certain alleles of a gene that are beneficial for one sex causes expression of potentially harmful traits by the same gene in the other sex, especially if the gene is located on an autosomal chromosome.\n\nPleiotropic genes act as an arbitrating force in speciation. William R. Rice and Ellen E. Hostert (1993) conclude that the observed prezygotic isolation in their studies is a product of pleiotropy's balancing role in indirect selection. By imitating the traits of all-infertile hybridized species, they noticed that the fertilization of eggs was prevented in all eight of their separate studies, a likely effect of pleiotropic genes on speciation. Likewise, pleiotropic gene's stabilizing selection allows for the allele frequency to be altered.\n\nStudies on fungal evolutionary genomics have shown pleiotropic traits that simultaneously affect adaptation and reproductive isolation, converting adaptations directly to speciation. A particularly telling case of this effect is host specificity in pathogenic ascomycetes and specifically, in \"venturia\", the fungus responsible for apple scab. These parasitic fungi each adapts to a host, and are only able to mate within a shared host after obtaining resources. Since a single toxin gene or virulence allele can grant the ability to colonize the host, adaptation and reproductive isolation are instantly facilitated, and in turn, pleiotropically causes adaptive speciation. The studies on fungal evolutionary genomics will further elucidate the earliest stages of divergence as a result of gene flow, and provide insight into pleiotropically induced adaptive divergence in other eukaryotes.\n\nSometimes, a pleiotropic gene may be both harmful and beneficial to an organism, which is referred to as \"antagonistic pleiotropy\". This may occur when the trait is beneficial for the organism's early life, but not its late life. Such \"trade-offs\" are possible since natural selection affects traits expressed earlier in life, when most organisms are most fertile, more than traits expressed later in life.\n\nThis idea is central to the antagonistic pleiotropy hypothesis, which was first developed by G.C. Williams in 1957. Williams suggested that some genes responsible for increased fitness in the younger, fertile organism contribute to decreased fitness later in life, which may give an evolutionary explanation for senescence. An example is the p53 gene, which suppresses cancer but also suppresses stem cells, which replenish worn-out tissue.\n\nUnfortunately, the process of antagonistic pleiotropy may result in an altered evolutionary path with delayed adaptation, in addition to effectively cutting the overall benefit of any alleles by roughly half. However, antagonistic pleiotropy also lends greater evolutionary \"staying power\" to genes controlling beneficial traits, since an organism with a mutation to those genes would have a decreased chance of successfully reproducing, as multiple traits would be affected, potentially for the worse.\n\nSickle cell anemia is a classic example of the mixed benefit given by the staying power of pleiotropic genes, as the mutation to Hb-S provides the fitness benefit of malaria resistance to heterozygotes, while homozygotes have significantly lowered life expectancy. Since both of these states are linked to the same mutated gene, large populations today are susceptible to sickle cell despite it being a fitness-impairing genetic disorder.\n\nAlbinism is the mutation of the TYR gene, also termed tyrosinase. This mutation causes the most common form of albinism. The mutation alters the production of melanin, thereby affecting melanin-related and other dependent traits throughout the organism. Melanin is a substance made by the body that is used to absorb light and provides coloration to the skin. Indications of albinism are the absence of color in an organism's eyes, hair, and skin, due to the lack of melanin. Some forms of albinism are also known to have symptoms that manifest themselves through rapid-eye movement, light sensitivity, and strabismus.\n\nPleiotropy in genes has been linked between certain psychiatric disorders as well. Deletion in the 22q11.2 region of chromosome 22 has been associated with schizophrenia and autism. Schizophrenia and autism are linked to the same gene deletion but manifest very differently from each other. The resulting phenotype depends on the stage of life at which the individual develops the disorder. Childhood manifestation of the gene deletion is typically associated with autism, while adolescent and later expression of the gene deletion often manifests in schizophrenia or other psychotic disorders. Though the disorders are linked by genetics, there is no increased risk found for adult schizophrenia in patients who experienced autism in childhood.\n\nA 2013 study also genetically linked five psychiatric disorders, including schizophrenia and autism. The link was a single nucleotide polymorphism of two genes involved in calcium channel signaling with neurons. One of these genes, CACNA1C, has been found to influence cognition. It has been associated with autism, as well as linked in studies to schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. These particular studies show clustering of these diseases within patients themselves or families. The estimated heritability of schizophrenia is 70% to 90%, therefore the pleiotropy of genes is crucial since it causes an increased risk for certain psychotic disorders and can aid psychiatric diagnosis.\n\nA common example of pleiotropy is the human disease phenylketonuria (PKU). This disease causes mental retardation and reduced hair and skin pigmentation, and can be caused by any of a large number of mutations in the single gene on chromosome 12 that codes for the enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase, which converts the amino acid phenylalanine to tyrosine. Depending on the mutation involved, this conversion is reduced or ceases entirely. Unconverted phenylalanine builds up in the bloodstream and can lead to levels that are toxic to the developing nervous system of newborn and infant children. The most dangerous form of this is called classic PKU, which is common in infants. The baby seems normal at first but actually incurs permanent intellectual disability. This can cause symptoms such as mental retardation, abnormal gait and posture, and delayed growth. Because tyrosine is used by the body to make melanin (a component of the pigment found in the hair and skin), failure to convert normal levels of phenylalanine to tyrosine can lead to fair hair and skin.\nThe frequency of this disease varies greatly. Specifically, in the United States, PKU is found at a rate of nearly 1 in 10,000 births. Due to newborn screening, doctors are able to detect PKU in a baby sooner. This allows them to start treatment early, preventing the baby from suffering from the severe effects of PKU. PKU is caused by a mutation in the PAH gene, whose role is to instruct the body on how to make phenylalanine hydroxylase. Phenylalanine hydroxylase is what converts the phenylalanine, taken in through diet, into other things that the body can use. The mutation often decreases the effectiveness or rate at which the hydroxylase breaks down the phenylalanine. This is what causes the phenylalanine to build up in the body. The way to treat PKU is to manage one's diet. Phenylalanine is ingested through food, so a diet should decrease types of foods that have high amounts of phenylalanine. Foods with high levels of protein must be avoided. These include breast milk, eggs, chicken, beef, pork, fish, nuts, and other foods. A special PKU formula can be obtained in order for the body to have protein.\n\nSickle cell anemia is a genetic disease that causes deformed red blood cells with a rigid, crescent shape instead of the normal flexible, round shape. It is caused by a change in one nucleotide, a point mutation in the HBB gene. The HBB gene encodes information to make the beta-globin subunit of hemoglobin, which is the protein red blood cells use to carry oxygen throughout the body. Sickle cell anemia occurs when the HBB gene mutation causes both beta-globin subunits of hemoglobin to change into hemoglobinS (HbS).\n\nSickle cell anemia is a pleiotropic disease because the expression of a single mutated HBB gene produces numerous consequences throughout the body. The mutated hemoglobin forms polymers and clumps together causing the deoxygenated sickle red blood cells to assume the disfigured sickle shape. As a result, the cells are inflexible and cannot easily flow through blood vessels, increasing the risk of blood clots and possibly depriving vital organs of oxygen. Some complications associated with sickle cell anemia include pain, damaged organs, strokes, high blood pressure, and loss of vision. Sickle red blood cells also have a shortened lifespan and die prematurely.\n\nMarfan syndrome (MFS) is an autosomal dominant disorder which affects 1 in 5–10,000 people. MFS arises from a mutation in the FBN1 gene, which encodes for the glycoprotein fibrillin-1, a major constituent of extracellular microfibrils which form connective tissues. Over 1,000 different mutations in FBN1 have been found to result in abnormal function of fibrillin, which consequently relates to connective tissues elongating progressively and weakening. Because these fibers are found in tissues throughout the body, mutations in this gene can have a widespread effect on certain systems, including the skeletal, cardiovascular, and nervous system, as well as the eyes and lungs.\n\nWithout medical intervention, prognosis of Marfan syndrome can range from moderate to life-threatening, with 90% of known causes of death in diagnosed patients relating to cardiovascular complications and congestive cardiac failure. Other characteristics of MFS include an increased arm span and decreased upper to lower body ratio.\n\nA gene recently discovered in laboratory house mice, termed \"mini-muscle\", causes a 50% reduction in hindlimb muscle mass as its primary effect (the phenotypic effect by which it was originally identified). In addition to smaller hindlimb muscle mass, the mice exhibit lower heart rates during physical activity, and a higher endurance. Mini Muscle Mice also exhibit larger kidneys and livers. All of these morphological deviations influence the behavior and Metabolism of the mouse. For example, mice with the Mini Muscle mutation were observed to have a higher per-gram aerobic capacity. The mini-muscle allele behaves as a Mendelian recessive gene. The mutation is a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in an intron of the Myosin heavy polypeptide4 gene.\n\nChickens exhibit various traits affected by pleiotropic genes. Some chickens exhibit frizzle feather trait, where their feathers all curl outward and upward rather than lying flat against the body. Frizzle feather was found to stem from a deletion in the genomic region coding for α-Keratin. This gene seems to pleiotropically lead to other abnormalities like increased metabolism, higher food consumption, accelerated heart rate, and delayed sexual maturity.\n\nDomesticated chickens underwent a rapid selection process that led to unrelated phenotypes having high correlations, suggesting pleiotropic, or at least close linkage, effects between comb mass and physiological structures related to reproductive abilities. Both males and females with larger combs have higher bone density and strength, which allows females to deposit more calcium into eggshells. This linkage is further evidenced by the fact that two of the genes, HAO1 and BMP2, affecting medullary bone (the part of the bone that transfers calcium into developing eggshells) are located at the same locus as the gene affecting comb mass. HAO1 and BMP2 also display pleiotropic effects with commonly desired domestic chicken behavior; those chickens who express higher levels of these two genes in bone tissue produce more eggs and display less egg incubation behavior.\n\n", "id": "1505283", "title": "Pleiotropy"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=418307", "text": "Weismann barrier\n\nThe Weismann barrier, proposed by August Weismann, is the strict distinction between the \"immortal\" germ cell lineages producing gametes and \"disposable\" somatic cells. In more precise terminology, hereditary information moves only from germline cells to somatic cells (that is, somatic mutations are not inherited). This does not refer to the central dogma of molecular biology, which states that no sequential information can travel from protein to DNA or RNA, but both hypotheses relate to a gene-centric view of life.\n\nWeismann set out the concept in his 1892 book \"Das Keimplasma: eine Theorie der Vererbung\" (The Germ Plasm: a theory of inheritance).\n\nThe Weismann barrier was of great importance in its day and among other influences it effectively banished certain Lamarckian concepts. It remains important, but has however required qualification in the light of modern understanding of horizontal gene transfer and some other genetic and histological developments. The use of this theory, commonly in the context of the germ plasm theory of the late 19th century, before the development of better-based and more sophisticated concepts of genetics in the early 20th century, is sometimes referred to as Weismannism. Some authors call Weismannist development (either preformistic or epigenetic) that in which there is a distinct germ line, differently of somatic embryogenesis. This type of development is correlated with the evolution of death of the somatic line.\n\nIn plants, genetic changes in somatic lines can and do result in genetic changes in the germ lines, because the germ cells are produced by somatic cell lineages (vegetative meristems), which may be old enough (many years) to have accumulated multiple mutations since seed germination, some of them subject to natural selection. Likewise, basal animals such as sponges (Porifera) and corals (Anthozoa) contain multipotent stem cell lineages, that give rise to both somatic and reproductive cells. Weismann barrier appears to be of a more recent evolutionary origin.\n\n", "id": "418307", "title": "Weismann barrier"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=297382", "text": "Quantitative genetics\n\nQuantitative genetics is a branch of population genetics that deals with phenotypes that vary continuously (in characters such as height or mass)—as opposed to discretely identifiable phenotypes and gene-products (such as eye-colour, or the presence of a particular biochemical).\n\nBoth branches use the frequencies of different alleles of a gene in breeding populations (gamodemes), and combine them with concepts from simple Mendelian inheritance to analyze inheritance patterns across generations and descendant lines. While population genetics can focus on particular genes and their subsequent metabolic products, quantitative genetics focuses more on the outward phenotypes, and makes summaries only of the underlying genetics.\n\nDue to the continuous distribution of phenotypic values, quantitative genetics must employ many other statistical methods (such as the \"effect size\", the \"mean\" and the \"variance\") to link phenotypes (attributes) to genotypes. Some phenotypes may be analyzed either as discrete categories or as continuous phenotypes, depending on the definition of cut-off points, or on the \"metric\" used to quantify them. Mendel himself had to discuss this matter in his famous paper, especially with respect to his peas attribute \"tall/dwarf\", which actually was \"length of stem\". Analysis of quantitative trait loci, or QTL, is a more recent addition to quantitative genetics, linking it more directly to molecular genetics.\n\nIn diploid organisms, the average genotypic \"value\" (locus value) may be defined by the allele \"effect\" together with a dominance effect, and also by how genes interact with genes at other loci (epistasis). The founder of quantitative genetics - Sir Ronald Fisher - perceived much of this when he proposed the first mathematics of this branch of genetics.\nBeing a statistician, he defined the gene effects as deviations from a central value—enabling the use of statistical concepts such as mean and variance, which use this idea. The central value he chose for the gene was the midpoint between the two opposing homozygotes at the one locus. The deviation from there to the \"greater\" homozygous genotype can be named \"\"+a\"\" ; and therefore it is \"\"-a\"\" from that same midpoint to the \"lesser\" homozygote genotype. This is the \"allele\" effect mentioned above. The heterozygote deviation from the same midpoint can be named \"\"d\"\", this being the \"dominance\" effect referred to above. The diagram depicts the idea. However, in reality we measure phenotypes, and the figure also shows how observed phenotypes relate to the gene effects. Formal definitions of these effects recognize this phenotypic focus. Epistasis has been approached statistically as interaction (i.e., inconsistencies), but \"epigenetics\" suggests a new approach may be needed.\n\nIf 0<da was known as \"over-dominance\".\n\nMendel's pea attribute \"length of stem\" provides us with a good example. Mendel stated that the tall true-breeding parents ranged from 6–7 feet in stem length (183 – 213 cm), giving a median of 198 cm (= P1). The short parents ranged from 0.75–1.25 feet in stem length (23 – 46 cm), with a rounded median of 34 cm (= P2). Their hybrid ranged from 6–7.5 feet in length (183–229 cm), with a median of 206 cm (= F1). The mean of P1 and P2 is 116 cm, this being the phenotypic value of the homozygotes midpoint (mp). The allele affect (\"a\") is [P1-mp] = 82 cm = -[P2-mp]. The dominance effect (\"d\") is [F1-mp] = 90 cm. This historical example illustrates clearly how phenotype values and gene effects are linked.\n\nTo obtain means, variances and other statistics, both \"quantities\" and their \"occurrences\" are required. The gene effects (above) provide the framework for \"quantities\": and the \"frequencies\" of the contrasting alleles in the fertilization gamete-pool provide the information on \"occurrences\". Commonly, the frequency of the allele causing \"more\" in the phenotype (including dominance) is given the symbol p, while the frequency of the contrasting allele is q. An initial assumption made when establishing the algebra was that the parental population was infinite and random mating, which was made simply to facilitate the derivation. The subsequent mathematical development also implied that the frequency distribution within the effective gamete-pool was uniform: there were no local perturbations where p and q varied. Looking at the diagrammatic analysis of sexual reproduction, this is the same as declaring that p = p = p; and similarly for q. This mating system, dependent upon these assumptions, became known as \"panmixia\".\n\nPanmixia rarely actually occurs in nature, as gamete distribution may be limited, for example by dispersal restrictions or by behaviour, or by chance sampling (those local perturbations mentioned above). It is well-known that there is a huge wastage of gametes in Nature, which is why the diagram depicts a \"potential\" gamete-pool separately to the \"actual\" gamete-pool. Only the latter sets the definitive frequencies for the zygotes: this is the true \"gamodeme\" (\"gamo\" refers to the gametes, and \"deme\" derives from Greek for \"population\"). But, under Fisher's assumptions, the \"gamodeme\" can be effectively extended back to the \"potential\" gamete-pool, and even back to the parental base-population (the \"source\" population). The random sampling arising when small \"actual\" gamete-pools are sampled from a large \"potential\" gamete-pool is known as \"genetic drift\", and is considered subsequently.\n\nWhile panmixia may not be widely extant, the \"potential\" for it does occur, although it may be only ephemeral because of those local perturbations. It has been shown, for example, that the F2 derived from \"random fertilization of F1 individuals\" (an \"allogamous\" F2), following hybridization, is an \"origin\" of a new \"potentially\" panmictic population. It has also been shown that if panmictic random fertilization occurred continually, it would maintain the same allele and genotype frequencies across each successive panmictic sexual generation—this being the \"Hardy Weinberg\" equilibrium. However, as soon as genetic drift was initiated by local random sampling of gametes, the equilibrium would cease.\n\nMale and female gametes within the actual fertilizing pool are considered usually to have the same frequencies for their corresponding alleles. (Exceptions have been considered.) This means that when p male gametes carrying the A allele randomly fertilize p female gametes carrying that same allele, the resulting zygote has genotype AA, and, under random fertilization, the combination occurs with a frequency of p x p (= p). Similarly, the zygote aa occurs with a frequency of q. Heterozygotes (Aa) can arise in two ways: when p male (A allele) randomly fertilize q female (a allele) gametes, and \"vice versa\". The resulting frequency for the heterozygous zygotes is thus 2pq. Notice that such a population is never more than half heterozygous, this maximum occurring when p=q= 0.5.\n\nIn summary then, under random fertilization, the zygote (genotype) frequencies are the quadratic expansion of the gametic (allelic) frequencies: formula_1. (The \"=1\" states that the frequencies are in fraction form, not percentages; and that there are no omissions within the framework proposed.)\n\nNotice that \"random fertilization\" and \"panmixia\" are \"not\" synonyms.\n\nMendel's pea experiments were constructed by establishing true-breeding parents with \"opposite\" phenotypes for each attribute. This meant that each opposite parent was homozygous for its respective allele only. In our example, \"tall \"vs\" dwarf\", the tall parent would be genotype TT with p = 1 (and q = 0); while the dwarf parent would be genotype tt with q = 1 (and p = 0). After controlled crossing, their hybrid is Tt, with p = q = ½. However, the frequency of this heterozygote = 1, because this is the F1 of an artificial cross: it has not arisen through random fertilization. The F2 generation was produced by natural self-pollination of the F1 (with monitoring against insect contamination), resulting in p = q = ½ being maintained. Such an F2 is said to be \"autogamous\". However, the genotype frequencies (0.25 TT, 0.5 Tt, 0.25 tt) have arisen through a mating system very different from random fertilization, and therefore the use of the quadratic expansion has been avoided. The numerical values obtained were the same as those for random fertilization only because this is the special case of having originally crossed homozygous opposite parents. We can notice that, because of the dominance of T- [frequency (0.25 + 0.5)] over tt [frequency 0.25], the 3:1 ratio is still obtained.\n\nA cross such as Mendel's, where true-breeding (largely homozygous) opposite parents are crossed in a controlled way to produce an F1, is a special case of hybrid structure. The F1 is often regarded as \"entirely heterozygous\" for the gene under consideration. However, this is an over-simplification and does not apply generally—for example when individual parents are not homozygous, or when \"populations\" inter-hybridise to form \"hybrid swarms\". The general properties of intra-species hybrids (F1) and F2 (both \"autogamous\" and \"allogamous\") are considered in a later section.\n\nHaving noticed that the pea is naturally self-pollinated, we cannot continue to use it as an example for illustrating random fertilization properties. Self-fertilization (\"selfing\") is a major alternative to random fertilization, especially within Plants. Most of the Earth's cereals are naturally self-pollinated (rice, wheat, barley, for example), as well as the pulses. Considering the millions of individuals of each of these on Earth at any time, it's obvious that self-fertilization is at least as significant as random fertilization. Self-fertilization is the most intensive form of \"inbreeding\", which arises whenever there is restricted independence in the genetical origins of gametes. Such reduction in independence arises if parents are already related, and/or from genetic drift or other spatial restrictions on gamete dispersal. Path analysis demonstrates that these are tantamount to the same thing. Arising from this background, the \"inbreeding coefficient\" (often symbolized as F or f) quantifies the effect of inbreeding from whatever cause. There are several formal definitions of f, and some of these are considered in later sections. For the present, note that for a long-term self-fertilized species f = 1.\nNatural self-fertilized populations are not single \" \"pure lines\" \", however, but mixtures of such lines. This becomes particularly obvious when considering more than one gene at a time. Therefore, allele frequencies (p and q) other than 1 or 0 are still relevant in these cases (refer back to the Mendel Cross section). The genotype frequencies take a different form, however.\nIn general, the genotype frequencies become formula_2 for AA and formula_3 for Aa and formula_4 for aa.\n\nNotice that the frequency of the heterozygote declines in proportion to f. When \"f\" = 1, these three frequencies become respectively p, 0 and q Conversely, when f = 0, they reduce to the random-fertilization quadratic expansion shown previously.\n\nThe population mean shifts the central reference point from the homozygote midpoint (mp) to the mean of a sexually reproduced population. This is important not only to relocate the focus into the natural world, but also to use a measure of \"central tendency\" used by Statistics/Biometrics. In particular, the square of this mean is the Correction Factor, which is used to obtain the genotypic variances later. \n\nFor each genotype in turn, its allele effect is multiplied by its genotype frequency; and the products are accumulated across all genotypes in the model. Some algebraic simplification usually follows to reach a succinct result.\n\nThe contribution of AA is formula_5, that of Aa is formula_6, and that of aa is formula_7. Gathering together the two a terms and accumulating over all, the result is: formula_8. Simplification is achieved by noting that formula_9, and by recalling that formula_10, thereby reducing the right-hand term to formula_11.\n\nThe succinct result is therefore formula_12. \n\nThis defines the population mean as an \"offset\" from the homozygote midpoint (recall a and d are defined as \"deviations\" from that midpoint). The Figure depicts G across all values of p for several values of d, including one case of slight over-dominance. Notice that G is often negative, thereby emphasizing that it is itself a \"deviation\" (from mp).\n\nFinally, to obtain the \"actual\" Population Mean in \"phenotypic space\", the midpoint value is added to this offset: formula_13.\n\nAn example arises from data on ear length in maize. Assuming for now that one gene only is represented, a = 5.45 cm, d = 0.12 cm [virtually \"0\", really], mp = 12.05 cm. Further assuming that p = 0.6 and q = 0.4 in this example population, then:\n\nG = 5.45 (0.6 − 0.4) + (0.48)0.12 = 1.15 cm (rounded); and\n\nP = 1.15 + 12.05 = 13.20 cm (rounded).\n\nThe contribution of AA is formula_14, while that of aa is formula_15. [See above for the frequencies.] Gathering these two a terms together leads to an immediately very simple final result:\n\nformula_16. As before, formula_13.\n\nOften, \"G\" is abbreviated to \"G\".\n\nMendel's peas can provide us with the allele effects and midpoint (see previously); and a mixed self-pollinated population with p = 0.6 and q = 0.4 provides example frequencies. Thus:\n\nG = 82 (0.6 − .04) = 59.6 cm (rounded); and\n\nP = 59.6 + 116 = 175.6 cm (rounded).\n\nA general formula incorporates the inbreeding coefficient f, and can then accommodate any situation. The procedure is exactly the same as before, using the weighted genotype frequencies given earlier. After translation into our symbols, and further rearrangement: \n\nformula_18\nHere, G is G, which was given earlier. (Often, when dealing with inbreeding, \"G\" is preferred to \"G\".)\n\nSupposing that the maize example [given earlier] had been constrained on a holme (a narrow riparian meadow), and had partial inbreeding to the extent of f = 0.25, then, using the third version (above) of G:\n\nG = 1.15 − 0.25 (0.48) 0.12 = 1.136   cm (rounded), with P = 13.194   cm (rounded).\n\nThere is hardly any effect from inbreeding in this example, which arises because there was virtually no dominance in this attribute (d → 0). Examination of all three versions of G reveals that this would lead to trivial change in the Population mean. Where dominance was notable, however, there would be considerable change.\n\nGenetic drift was introduced when discussing the likelihood of panmixia being widely extant as a natural fertilization pattern. [See section on Allele and Genotype frequencies.] Here the sampling of gametes from the \"potential\" gamodeme is discussed in more detail. The sampling involves random fertilization between pairs of random gametes, each of which may contain either an A or an a allele. The sampling is therefore binomial sampling. Each sampling \"packet\" involves 2N alleles, and produces N zygotes (a \"progeny\" or a \"line\") as a result. During the course of the reproductive period, this sampling is repeated over and over, so that the final result is a mixture of sample progenies. The result is \"dispersed random fertilization\" formula_19 These events, and the overall end-result, are examined here with an illustrative example.\n\nThe \"base\" allele frequencies of the example are those of the \"potential gamodeme\": the frequency of A is p = 0.75, while the frequency of a is q = 0.25. [\"White label\" \"1\" in the diagram.] Five example actual gamodemes are binomially sampled out of this base (s = the number of samples = 5), and each sample is designated with an \"index\" k: with k = 1 ... s sequentially. (These are the sampling \"packets\" referred to in the previous paragraph.) The number of gametes involved in fertilization varies from sample to sample, and is given as 2N [at \"white label\" \"2\" in the diagram]. The total (Σ) number of gametes sampled overall is 52 [\"white label\" \"3\" in the diagram]. Because each sample has its own size, \"weights\" are needed to obtain averages (and other statistics) when obtaining the overall results. These are formula_20, and are given at \"white label\" \"4\" in the diagram.\nFollowing completion of these five binomial sampling events, the resultant actual gamodemes each contained different allele frequencies—(p and q). [These are given at \"white label\" \"5\" in the diagram.] This outcome is actually the genetic drift itself. Notice that two samples (k = 1 and 5) happen to have the same frequencies as the \"base\" (\"potential\") gamodeme. Another (k = 3) happens to have the \"p\" and \"q\" \"reversed\". Sample (k = 2) happens to be an \"extreme\" case, with p = 0.9 and q = 0.1 ; while the remaining sample (k = 4) is \"middle of the range\" in its allele frequencies. All of these results have arisen only by \"chance\", through binomial sampling. Having occurred, however, they set in place all the downstream properties of the progenies.\n\nBecause sampling involves chance, the \"probabilities\" ( ) of obtaining each of these samples become of interest. These binomial probabilities depend on the starting frequencies (p and q) and the sample size (2N). They are tedious to obtain, but are of considerable interest. [See \"white label\" \"6\" in the diagram.] The two samples (k = 1, 5), with the allele frequencies the same as in the \"potential gamodeme\", had higher \"chances\" of occurring than the other samples. Their binomial probabilities did differ, however, because of their different sample sizes (2N). The \"reversal\" sample (k = 3) had a very low Probability of occurring, confirming perhaps what might be expected. The \"extreme\" allele frequency gamodeme (k = 2) was not \"rare\", however; and the \"middle of the range\" sample (k=4) \"was\" rare. These same Probabilities apply also to the progeny of these fertilizations.\nHere, some \"summarizing\" can begin. The \"overall allele frequencies\" in the progenies bulk are supplied by weighted averages of the appropriate frequencies of the individual samples. That is: formula_21 and formula_22. (Notice that k is replaced by • for the overall result—a common practice.) The results for the example are p = 0.631 and q = 0.369 [\"black label\" \"5\" in the diagram]. These values are quite different to the starting ones (p and q) [\"white label\" \"1\"]. The sample allele frequencies also have variance as well as an average. This has been obtained using the \"sum of squares (SS)\" method [See to the right of \"black label\" \"5\" in the diagram]. [Further discussion on this variance occurs in the section below on Extensive genetic drift.]\n\nThe \"genotype frequencies\" of the five sample progenies are obtained from the usual quadratic expansion of their respective allele frequencies (\"random fertilization\"). The results are given at the diagram's \"white label\" \"7\" for the homozygotes, and at \"white label\" \"8\" for the heterozygotes. Re-arrangement in this manner prepares the way for monitoring inbreeding levels. This can be done either by examining the level of \"total\" homozygosis [(p + q) = (1 − 2pq)] , or by examining the level of heterozygosis (2pq), as they are complementary. Notice that samples \"k= 1, 3, 5\" all had the same level of heterozygosis, despite one being the \"mirror image\" of the others with respect to allele frequencies. The \"extreme\" allele-frequency case (k= \"2\") had the most homozygosis (least heterozygosis) of any sample. The \"middle of the range\" case (k= \"4\") had the least homozygosity (most heterozygosity): they were each equal at 0.50, in fact.\n\nThe \"overall summary\" can continue by obtaining the \"weighted average\" of the respective genotype frequencies for the progeny bulk. Thus, for AA, it is formula_23, for Aa , it is formula_24 and for aa, it is formula_25. The example results are given at \"black label\" \"7\" for the homozygotes, and at \"black label\" \"8\" for the heterozygote. Note that the heterozygosity mean is \"0.3588\", which the next section uses to examine inbreeding resulting from this genetic drift.\n\nThe next focus of interest is the dispersion itself, which refers to the \"spreading apart\" of the progenies' \"population means\". These are obtained as formula_26 [see section on the Population mean], for each sample progeny in turn, using the example gene effects given at \"white label\" \"9\" in the diagram. Then, each formula_27 is obtained also [at \"white label\" \"10\" in the diagram]. Notice that the \"best\" line (k = 2) had the \"highest\" allele frequency for the \"more\" allele (A) (it also had the highest level of homozygosity). The \"worst\" progeny (k = 3) had the highest frequency for the \"less\" allele (a), which accounted for its poor performance. This \"poor\" line was less homozygous than the \"best\" line; and it shared the same level of homozygosity, in fact, as the two \"second-best\" lines (k = 1, 5). The progeny line with both the \"more\" and the \"less\" alleles present in equal frequency (k = 4) had a mean below the \"overall average\" (see next paragraph), and had the lowest level of homozygosity. These results reveal the fact that the alleles most prevalent in the \"gene-pool\" (also called the \"germplasm\") determine performance, not the level of homozygosity per se. Binomial sampling alone effects this dispersion.\n\nThe \"overall summary\" can now be concluded by obtaining formula_28 and formula_29. The example result for P is 36.94 (\"black label\" \"10\" in the diagram). This later is used to quantify \"inbreeding depression\" overall, from the gamete sampling. [See the next section.] However, recall that some \"non-depressed\" progeny means have been identified already (k = 1, 2, 5). This is an enigma of inbreeding—while there may be \"depression\" overall, there are usually superior lines among the gamodeme samplings.\n\nIncluded in the \"overall summary\" were the average allele frequencies in the mixture of progeny lines (p and q). These can now be used to construct a hypothetical panmictic equivalent. This can be regarded as a \"reference\" to assess the changes wrought by the gamete sampling. The example appends such a panmictic to the right of the Diagram. The frequency of AA is therefore (p) = 0.3979. This is less than that found in the dispersed bulk (0.4513 at \"black label\" \"7\"). Similarly, for aa, (q) = 0.1303—again less than the equivalent in the progenies bulk (0.1898). Clearly, \"genetic drift\" has increased the overall level of homozygosis by the amount (0.6411 − 0.5342) = 0.1069. In a complementary approach, the heterozygosity could be used instead. The panmictic equivalent for Aa is 2 p q = 0.4658, which is \"higher\" than that in the sampled bulk (0.3588) [\"black label\" \"8\"]. The sampling has caused the heterozygosity to decrease by 0.1070, which differs trivially from the earlier estimate because of rounding errors.\n\nThe inbreeding coefficient (f) was introduced in the early section on Self Fertilization. Here, a formal definition of it is considered: f is the probability that two \"same\" alleles (that is A and A, or a and a), which fertilize together are of common ancestral origin—or (more formally) f is the probability that two homologous alleles are autozygous. Consider any random gamete in the \"potential\" gamodeme that has its syngamy partner restricted by binomial sampling. The probability that that second gamete is homologous autozygous to the first is 1/(2N), the reciprocal of the gamodeme size. For the five example progenies, these quantities are 0.1, 0.0833, 0.1, 0.0833 and 0.125 respectively, and their weighted average is 0.0961. This is the \"inbreeding coefficient\" of the example progenies bulk, provided it is \"unbiased\" with respect to the full binomial distribution. An example based upon \"s = 5\" is likely to be biased, however, when compared to an appropriate entire binomial distribution based upon the sample number (\"s\") approaching infinity (\"s → ∞\"). Another derived definition of f for the full Distribution is that f also equals the rise in homozygosity, which equals the fall in heterozygosity. For the example, these frequency changes are \"0.1069\" and \"0.1070\", respectively. This result is different to the above, indicating that bias with respect to the full underlying distribution is present in the example. For the example \"itself\", these latter values are the better ones to use, namely f = 0.10695.\n\nThe \"population mean\" of the equivalent panmictic is found as \"[a (p-q) + 2 pq d] + mp\". Using the example \"gene effects\" (\"white label\" \"9\" in the diagram), this mean is formula_30 37.87. The equivalent mean in the dispersed bulk is 36.94 (\"black label\" \"10\"), which is depressed by the amount \"0.93\". This is the \"inbreeding depression\" from this Genetic Drift. However, as noted previously, three progenies were \"not\" depressed (k = 1, 2, 5), and had means even greater than that of the panmictic equivalent. These are the lines a plant breeder looks for in a line selection programme.\n\nIf the number of binomial samples is large (s → ∞ ), then p → p and q → q. It might be queried whether panmixia would effectively re-appear under these circumstances. However, the sampling of allele frequencies has \"still occurred\", with the result that σ ≠ 0. In fact, as s → ∞, the formula_31, which is the \"variance\" of the \"whole binomial distribution\". Furthermore, the \"Wahlund equations\" show that the progeny-bulk \"homozygote\" frequencies can be obtained as the sums of their respective average values (p or q) \"plus\" σ. Likewise, the bulk \"heterozygote\" frequency is (2 p q) \"minus\" twice the σ. The variance arising from the binomial sampling is conspicuously present. Thus, even when s → ∞, the progeny-bulk \"genotype\" frequencies still reveal \"increased homozygosis\", and \"decreased heterozygosis\", there is still \"dispersion of progeny means\", and still \"inbreeding\" and \"inbreeding depression\". That is, panmixia is \"not\" re-attained once lost because of genetic drift (binomial sampling). However, a new \"potential\" panmixia can be initiated via an allogamous F2 following hybridization.\n\nPrevious discussion on genetic drift examined just one cycle (generation) of the process. When the sampling continues over successive generations, conspicuous changes occur in σ and f. Furthermore, another \"index\" is needed to keep track of \"time\": t = 1 ... y where y = the number of \"years\" (generations) considered. The methodology often is to add the current binomial increment (Δ = \"\"de novo\"\") to what has occurred previously. The entire Binomial Distribution is examined here. [There is no further benefit to be had from an abbreviated example.]\n\nEarlier this variance (σ ) was seen to be:-\nformula_32\n\nWith the extension over time, this is also the result of the \"first\" cycle, and so is formula_33 (for brevity). At cycle 2, this variance is generated yet again—this time becoming the \"de novo\" variance (formula_34)—and accumulates to what was present already—the \"carry-over\" variance. The \"second\" cycle variance (formula_35) is the weighted sum of these two components, the weights being formula_36 for the \"de novo\" and formula_37 = formula_38 for the\"carry-over\". \nThus, \n\nThe extension to generalize to any time \"t\" , after considerable simplification, becomes:- \nBecause it was this variation in allele frequencies that caused the \"spreading apart\" of the progenies' means (\"dispersion\"), the change in σ over the generations indicates the change in the level of the \"dispersion\".\n\nThe method for examining the inbreeding coefficient is similar to that used for \"σ \". The same weights as before are used respectively for \"de novo f\" ( Δ f ) [recall this is 1/(2N) ] and \"carry-over f\". Therefore, formula_39 , which is similar to Equation (1) in the previous sub-section. \nIn general, after rearrangement, formula_40 The graphs to the left show levels of inbreeding over twenty generations arising from genetic drift for various \"actual gamodeme\" sizes (2N).\n\nStill further rearrangements of this general equation reveal some interesting relationships.\n(A) After some simplification, formula_41. The left-hand side is the difference between the current and previous levels of inbreeding: the \"change in inbreeding\" (δf). Notice, that this \"change in inbreeding\" (δf) is equal to the \"de novo inbreeding\" (Δf) only for the first cycle—when f is \"zero\".\n\n(B) An item of note is the (1-f), which is an \"index of \"non-inbreeding\"\". It is known as the \"panmictic index\". formula_42.\n\n(C) Further useful relationships emerge involving the \"panmictic index\".\nformula_43.\n(D) A key link emerges between \"σ \" and \"f\". Firstly ...\nformula_44\nSecondly, presuming that f = 0, the right-hand side of this equation reduces to the section within the brackets of Equation (2) at the end of the last sub-section. That is, if initially there is no inbreeding, formula_45 ! Furthermore, if this then is rearranged, formula_46. That is, when initial inbreeding is zero, the two principal viewpoints of \"binomial gamete sampling\" (genetic drift) are directly inter-convertible.\n\nIt is easy to overlook that \"random fertilization\" includes self-fertilization. Sewall Wright showed that a proportion 1/N of \"random fertilizations\" is actually \"self fertilization\" formula_47, with the remainder (N-1)/N being \"cross fertilization\" formula_48. Following path analysis and simplification, the new view \"random fertilization inbreeding\" was found to be: formula_49. Upon further rearrangement, the earlier results from the binomial sampling were confirmed, along with some new arrangements. Two of these were potentially very useful, namely: (A) formula_50; and (B) formula_51.\n\nThe recognition that selfing may \"intrinsically be a part of\" random fertilization leads to some issues about the use of the previous \"random fertilization\" 'inbreeding coefficient'. Clearly, then, it is inappropriate for any species incapable of \"self fertilization\", which includes plants with self-incompatibility mechanisms, dioecious plants, and bisexual animals. The equation of Wright was modified later to provide a version of random fertilization that involved only \"cross fertilization\" with no \"self fertilization\". The proportion 1/N formerly due to \"selfing\" now defined the \"carry-over\" gene-drift inbreeding arising from the previous cycle. The new version is:\nformula_52.\n\nThe graphs to the right depict the differences between standard \"random fertilization\" RF, and random fertilization adjusted for \"cross fertilization alone\" CF. As can be seen, the issue is non-trivial for small gamodeme sample sizes.\n\nIt now is necessary to note that not only is \"panmixia\" \"not\" a synonym for \"random fertilization\", but also that \"random fertilization\" is \"not\" a synonym for \"cross fertilization\".\n\nIn the sub-section on \"The sample gamodemes – Genetic drift\", a series of gamete samplings was followed, an outcome of which was an increase in homozygosity at the expense of heterozygosity. From this viewpoint, the rise in homozygosity was due to the gamete samplings. Levels of homozygosity can be viewed also according to whether homozygotes arose allozygously or autozygously. Recall that autozygous alleles have the same allelic origin, the likelihood (frequency) of which is the inbreeding coefficient (\"f\") by definition. The proportion arising \"allozygously\" is therefore (1-f). For the A-bearing gametes, which are present with a general frequency of p, the overall frequency of those that are autozygous is therefore (f \"p\"). Similarly, for a-bearing gametes, the autozygous frequency is (f \"q\"). These two viewpoints regarding genotype frequencies must be connected to establish consistency.\n\nFollowing firstly the \"auto/allo\" viewpoint, consider the \"allozygous\" component. This occurs with the frequency of (1-f), and the alleles unite according to the \"random fertilization\" quadratic expansion. Thus: \nformula_53 Consider next the \"autozygous\" component. As these alleles are \"autozygous\", they are effectively selfings, and produce either AA or aa genotypes, but no heterozygotes. They therefore produce formula_54 \"\"AA\"\" homozygotes plus formula_55 \"\"aa\"\" homozygotes. Adding these two components together results in:\nformula_56 for the AA homozygote; formula_57 for the aa homozygote; and formula_58 for the Aa heterozygote. This is the same equation as that presented earlier in the section on \"Self fertilization – an alternative\". The reason for the decline in heterozygosity is made clear here. Heterozygotes can arise only from the allozygous component, and its frequency in the sample bulk is just (1-f): hence this must also be the factor controlling the frequency of the heterozygotes.\n\nSecondly, the \"sampling\" viewpoint is re-examined. Previously, it was noted that the decline in heterozygotes was formula_59. This decline is distributed equally towards each homozygote; and is added to their basic \"random fertilization\" expectations. Therefore, the genotype frequencies are: formula_60 for the \"\"AA\"\" homozygote; formula_61 for the \"\"aa\"\" homozygote; and formula_62 for the heterozygote.\n\nThirdly, the \"consistency\" between the two previous viewpoints needs establishing. It is apparent at once [from the corresponding equations above] that the heterozygote frequency is the same in both viewpoints. However, such a straightforward result is not immediately apparent for the homozygotes. Begin by considering the AA homozygote's final equation in the \"auto/allo\" paragraph above:- formula_56. Expand the brackets, and follow by re-gathering [within the resultant] the two new terms with the common-factor \"f\" in them. The result is: formula_64. Next, for the parenthesized \" \"p\" \", a \"(1-q)\" is substituted for a \"p\", the result becoming formula_65. Following that substitution, it is a straightforward matter of multiplying-out, simplifying and watching signs. The end result is formula_66, which is exactly the result for AA in the \"sampling\" paragraph. The two viewpoints are therefore \"consistent\" for the AA homozygote. In a like manner, the consistency of the aa viewpoints can also be shown. The two viewpoints are consistent for all classes of genotypes.\n\nIn previous sections, dispersive random fertilization (\"genetic drift\") has been considered comprehensively, and self-fertilization and hybridizing have been examined to varying degrees. The diagram to the left depicts the first two of these, along with another \"spatially based\" pattern: \"islands\". This is a pattern of \"random fertilization\" featuring \"dispersed gamodemes\", with the addition of \"overlaps\" in which \"non-dispersive\" random fertilization occurs. With the \"islands\" pattern, individual gamodeme sizes (2N) are observable, and overlaps (m) are minimal. This is one of Sewall Wright's array of possibilities. In addition to \"spatially\" based patterns of fertilization, there are others based on either \"phenotypic\" or \"relationship\" criteria. The \"phenotypic\" bases include \"assortative\" fertilization (between similar phenotypes) and \"disassortative\" fertilization (between opposite phenotypes). The \"relationship\" patterns include \"sib crossing\", \"cousin crossing\" and \"backcrossing\"—and are considered in a separate section. \"Self fertilization\" may be considered both from a spatial or relationship point of view.\n\nThe breeding population consists of s small dispersed random fertilization gamodemes of sample size formula_67 ( k = 1 ... \"s\" ) with \" \"overlaps\" \" of proportion formula_68 in which non-dispersive random fertilization occurs. The \" dispersive proportion \" is thus formula_69. The bulk population consists of \"weighted averages\" of sample sizes, allele and genotype frequencies and progeny means, as was done for genetic drift in an earlier section. However, each \"gamete sample size\" is reduced to allow for the \"overlaps\", thus finding a formula_70 effective for formula_69.\nFor brevity, the argument is followed further with the subscripts omitted. Recall that formula_72 is formula_73 in general. [Here, and following, the \"2N\" refers to the \"previously defined\" sample size, not to any \"islands adjusted\" version.]\n\nAfter simplification, formula_74 \nNotice that when \"m = 0\" this reduces to the previous \"Δ f\". The reciprocal of this furnishes an estimate of the \" formula_70 \"effective for formula_69\" \", mentioned above.\n\nThis Δf is also substituted into the previous \"inbreeding coefficient\" to obtain \nformula_77 where \"t\" is the index over generations, as before.\n\nThe effective \"overlap proportion\" can be obtained also, as \nformula_78\n\nThe graphs to the right show the \"inbreeding\" for a gamodeme size of \"2N = 50\" for \"ordinary dispersed random fertilization \" (RF) \"(m=0)\", and for \"four overlap levels ( m = 0.0625, 0.125, 0.25, 0.5 )\" of islands \"random fertilization\". There has indeed been reduction in the inbreeding resulting from the \"non-dispersed random fertilization\" in the overlaps. It is particularly notable as m → 0.50. Sewall Wright suggested that this value should be the limit for the use of this approach.\n\nThe \"gene-model\" examines the heredity pathway from the point of view of \"inputs\" (alleles/gametes) and \"outputs\" (genotypes/zygotes), with fertilization being the \"process\" converting one to the other. An alternative viewpoint concentrates on the \"process\" itself, and considers the zygote genotypes as arising from allele shuffling. In particular, it regards the results as if one allele had \"substituted\" for the other during the shuffle, together with a residual that deviates from this view. This formed an integral part of Fisher's method, in addition to his use of frequencies and effects to generate his genetical statistics. A discursive derivation of the \"allele substitution\" alternative follows. \n\nSuppose that the usual random fertilization of gametes in a \"base\" gamodeme—consisting of p gametes (A) and q gametes (a)—is replaced by fertilization with a \"flood\" of gametes all containing a single allele (A or a, but not both). The zygotic results can be interpreted in terms of the \"flood\" allele having \"substituted for\" the alternative allele in the underlying \"base\" gamodeme. The diagram assists in following this viewpoint: the upper part pictures an A substitution, while the lower part shows an a substitution. (The diagram's \"RF allele\" is the allele in the \"base\" gamodeme.)\n\nConsider the upper part firstly. Because \"base\" A is present with a frequency of p, the \"substitute\" A fertilizes it with a frequency of p resulting in a zygote AA with an allele effect of a. Its contribution to the outcome, therefore, is the product formula_79. Similarly, when the \"substitute\" fertilizes \"base\" a (resulting in Aa with a frequency of q and heterozygote effect of d), the contribution is formula_80. The overall result of substitution by A is, therefore, formula_81. This is now oriented towards the population mean [see earlier section] by expressing it as a deviate from that mean : formula_82\n\nAfter some algebraic simplification, this becomes formula_83 \n- the \"substitution effect\" of A.\n\nA parallel reasoning can be applied to the lower part of the diagram, taking care with the differences in frequencies and gene effects. The result is the \"substitution effect\" of a, which is formula_84\nThe common factor inside the brackets is the \"average allele substitution effect\", and is formula_85\nIt can also be derived in a more direct way, but the result is the same.\n\nIn subsequent sections, these substitution effects help define the gene-model genotypes as consisting of a partition predicted by these new effects (substitution \"expectations\"), and a residual (substitution deviations) between these expectations and the previous gene-model effects. The \"expectations\" are also called the breeding values and the deviations are also called dominance deviations.\n\nUltimately, the variance arising from the \"substitution expectations\" becomes the so-called \"Additive genetic variance (σ)\" (also the \"Genic variance\" )— while that arising from the \"substitution deviations\" becomes the so-called \"Dominance variance (σ)\". It is noticeable that neither of these terms reflects the true meanings of these variances. The \"genic variance\" is less dubious than the \" additive genetic variance\", and more in line with Fisher's own name for this partition. A less-misleading name for the \"dominance deviations variance\" is the \"quasi-dominance variance\" [see following sections for further discussion]. These latter terms are preferred herein.\n\nThe gene-model effects (a, d and -a) are important soon in the derivation of the \"deviations from substitution\", which were first discussed in the previous \"Allele Substitution\" section. However, they need to be redefined themselves before they become useful in that exercise. They firstly need to be re-centralized around the population mean (G), and secondly they need to be re-arranged as functions of β, the \"average allele substitution effect\".\n\nConsider firstly the re-centralization. The re-centralized effect for AA is a• = a - G which, after simplification, becomes a• = 2\"q\"(a-\"p\"d). The similar effect for Aa is d• = d - G = a(\"q\"-\"p\") + d(1-2\"pq\"), after simplification. Finally, the re-centralized effect for aa is (-a)• = -2\"p\"(a+\"q\"d).\n\nSecondly, consider the re-arrangement of these re-centralized effects as functions of β. Recalling from the \"Allele Substitution\" section that β = [a +(q-p)d], rearrangement gives a = [β -(q-p)d]. After substituting this for a in a• and simplifying, the final version becomes a•• = 2q(β-qd). Similarly, d• becomes d•• = β(q-p) + 2pqd; and (-a)• becomes (-a)•• = -2p(β+pd).\n\nThe zygote genotypes are the target of all this preparation. The homozygous genotype AA is a union of two \"substitution effects of A\", one from each sex. Its \"substitution expectation\" is therefore β = 2β = 2\"q\"β (see previous sections). Similarly, the \"substitution expectation\" of Aa is β = β + β = (\"q\"-\"p\")β ; and for aa, β = 2β = -2\"p\"β. These \"substitution expectations\" of the genotypes are also called \"breeding values\".\n\n\"Substitution deviations\" are the differences between these \"expectations\" and the \"gene effects\" after their two-stage redefinition in the previous section. Therefore, d = a•• - β = -2\"q\"d after simplification. Similarly, d = d•• - β = 2\"pq\"d after simplification. Finally, d = (-a)•• - β = -2\"p\"d after simplification. Notice that all of these \"substitution deviations\" ultimately are functions of the gene-effect \"d\"—which accounts for the use of [\"d\" plus subscript] as their symbols. However, it is a serious \"non sequitur\" in logic to regard them as accounting for the dominance (heterozygosis) in the entire gene model : they are simply \"functions\" of \"d\" and not an \"audit\" of the \"d\" in the system. They \"are\" as derived: \"deviations from the substitution expectations\"!\n\nThe \"substitution expectations\" ultimately give rise to the σ (the so-called \"Additive\" genetic variance); and the \"substitution deviations\" give rise to the σ (the so-called \"Dominance\" genetic variance). Be aware, however, that the average substitution effect (β) also contains \"d\" [see previous sections], indicating that dominance is also embedded within the \"Additive\" variance [see following sections on the Genotypic Variance for their derivations]. Remember also [see previous paragraph] that the \"substitution deviations\" do not account for the dominance in the system (being nothing more than deviations from the \"substitution expectations\"), but which happen to consist algebraically of functions of \"d\". More appropriate names for these respective variances might be σ (the \"Breeding expectations\" variance) and σ (the \"Breeding deviations\" variance). However, as noted previously, \"Genic\" (σ ) and \"Quasi-Dominance\" (σ ), respectively, will be preferred herein.\n\nThere are two major approaches to defining and partitioning \"genotypic variance\". One is based on the \"gene-model effects\", while the other is based on the \"genotype substitution effects\" They are algebraically inter-convertible with each other. In this section, the basic random fertilization derivation is considered, with the effects of inbreeding and dispersion set aside. This is dealt with later to arrive at a more general solution. Until this \"mono-genic\" treatment is replaced by a \"multi-genic\" one, and until \"epistasis\" is resolved in the light of the findings of \"epigenetics\", the Genotypic variance has only the components considered here.\n\nIt is convenient to follow the Biometrical approach, which is based on correcting the \"unadjusted sum of squares (USS)\" by subtracting the \"correction factor (CF)\". Because all effects have been examined through frequencies, the USS can be obtained as the sum of the products of each genotype's frequency' and the square of its \"gene-effect\". The CF in this case is the mean squared. The result is the SS, which, again because of the use of frequencies, is also immediately the \"variance\".\n\nThe formula_86, and the formula_87. The formula_88\n\nAfter partial simplification,\nformula_89 \nThe last line is in Mather's terminology. \n\nHere, σ is the \"homozygote\" or allelic variance, and σ is the \"heterozygote\" or dominance variance. The \"substitution deviations\" variance (σ) is also present. The \"(weighted_covariance)\" is abbreviated hereafter to \" cov \".\n\nThese components are plotted across all values of p in the accompanying figure. Notice that \"cov\" is negative for \"p > 0.5\".\n\nFurther gathering of terms [in Mather format] leads to formula_90, where formula_91. It is useful later in Diallel analysis, which is an experimental design for estimating these genetical statistics.\n\nIf, following the last-given rearrangements, the first three terms are amalgamated together, rearranged further and simplified, the result is the variance of the Fisherian \"substitution expectation\".\n\nThat is: formula_92\n\nNotice particularly that σ is not σ. The first is the \"substitution expectations\" variance, while the second is the \"allelic\" variance. Notice also that σ (the \"substitution-deviations\" variance) is \"not\" σ (the \"dominance\" variance), and recall that it is an artifact arising from the use of \"G\" for the Correction Factor. [See the \"blue paragraph\" above.] It now will be referred to as the \"quasi-dominance\" variance.\n\nAlso note that σ < σ (\"2pq\" being always a fraction); and note that (1) σ = 2pq σ, and that (2) σ = σ / (2pq). That is: it is confirmed that σ does not quantify the dominance variance in the model. It is σ which does that. However, the dominance variance (σ) can be estimated readily from the σ if \"2pq\" is available.\n\nFrom the Figure, these results can be visualized as accumulating σ, σ and cov to obtain σ, while leaving the σ still separated. It is clear also in the Figure that σ < σ, as expected from the equations.\n\nThe overall result (in Fisher's format) is\nformula_93 \nThe Fisherian components have just been derived, but their derivation via the \"substitution effects\" themselves is given also, in the next section.\n\nReference to the several earlier sections on allele substitution reveals that the two ultimate effects are \"genotype substitution \" expectations and \"genotype substitution deviations\". Notice that these are each already defined as deviations from the \"random fertilization\" population mean (G). For each genotype in turn therefore, the product of the frequency and the square of the relevant effect is obtained, and these are accumulated to obtain directly a SS and σ. Details follow.\n\nσ = p\" β + 2\"pq\" β + q\" β, which simplifies to σ = 2\"pq\"β—the Genic variance.\n\nσ = p\" d + 2\"pq\" d + q\" d, which simplifies to σ = (2\"pq\") d—the quasi-Dominance variance.\n\nUpon accumulating these results, σ = σ + σ . These components are visualized in the graphs to the right. The \"average allele substitution\" effect is graphed also, but the symbol is \"α\" (as is common in the citations) rather than \"β\" (as is used herein).\n\nOnce again, however, refer to the earlier discussions about the true meanings and identities of these components. Fisher himself did not use these modern terms for his components. The \"substitution expectations\" variance he named the \"genetic\" variance; and the \"substitution deviations\" variance he regarded simply as the unnamed residual between the \"genotypic\" variance (his name for it) and his \"genetic\" variance. [The terminology and derivation used in this article are completely in accord with Fisher's own.] Mather's term for the \"expectations\" variance—\"genic\"—is obviously derived from Fisher's term, and avoids using \"genetic\" (which has become too generalized in usage to be of value in the present context). The origin is obscure of the modern misleading terms \"additive\" and \"dominance\" variances.\n\nNote that this allele-substitution approach defined the components separately, and then totaled them to obtain the final Genotypic variance. Conversely, the gene-model approach derived the whole situation (components and total) as one exercise. Bonuses arising from this were (a) the revelations about the real structure of σ, and (b) the real meanings and relative sizes of σ and σ (see previous sub-section). It is also apparent that a \"Mather\" analysis is more informative, and that a \"Fisher\" analysis can always be constructed from it. The opposite conversion is not possible, however, because information about cov would be missing.\n\nIn the section on genetic drift, and in other sections that discuss inbreeding, a major outcome from allele frequency sampling has been the \"dispersion\" of progeny means. This collection of means has its own average, and also has a variance: the \"amongst-line variance\". (This is a variance of the attribute itself, not of \"allele frequencies\".) As dispersion develops further over succeeding generations, this amongst-line variance would be expected to increase. Conversely, as homozygosity rises, the within-lines variance would be expected to decrease. The question arises therefore as to whether the total variance is changing—and, if so, in what direction. To date, these issues have been presented in terms of the \"genic (σ )\" and \"quasi-dominance (σ )\" variances rather than the gene-model components. This will be done herein as well.\n\nThe crucial \"overview equation\" comes from Sewall Wright, and is the outline of the inbred genotypic variance based on a \"weighted average of its extremes\", the weights being quadratic with respect to the \"inbreeding coefficient\" \nformula_94. This equation is:\n\nformula_95\n\nwhere formula_94 is the inbreeding coefficient, formula_97 is the genotypic variance at \n\"f=0\", formula_98 is the genotypic variance at \"f=1\", \nformula_99 is the population mean at \"f=0\", and formula_100 is the population mean at \"f=1\".\n\nThe formula_101 component [in the equation above] outlines the reduction of variance within progeny lines. The formula_94 component addresses the increase in variance amongst progeny lines. Lastly, the formula_103 component is seen (in the next line) to address the \"quasi-dominance\" variance. These components can be expanded further thereby revealing additional insight. Thus:-\n\nformula_104\n\nFirstly, \"σ\" [in the equation above] has been expanded to show its two sub-components [see section on \"Genotypic variance\"]. Next, the \"σ\" has been converted to \"4pqa \", and is derived in a section following. The third component's substitution is the difference between the two \"inbreeding extremes\" of the population mean [see section on the \"Population Mean\"].\nSummarising: the within-line components are formula_105 and formula_106; and the amongst-line components are formula_107 and formula_108.\nRearranging gives the following:\nformula_109 \nThe version in the last line is discussed further in a subsequent section.\n\nSimilarly,\nformula_110\nGraphs to the left show these three genic variances, together with the three quasi-dominance variances, across all values of f, for p = 0.5 (at which the quasi-dominance variance is at a maximum). Graphs to the right show the Genotypic variance partitions (being the sums of the respective \"genic\" and \"quasi-dominance\" partitions) changing over ten generations with an example \"f = 0.10\".\n\nAnswering, firstly, the questions posed at the beginning about the total variances [the Σ in the graphs] : the \"genic variance\" rises linearly with the \"inbreeding coefficient\", maximizing at twice its starting level. The \"quasi-dominance variance\" declines at the rate of \"(1 − f )\" until it finishes at zero. At low levels of \"f\", the decline is very gradual, but it accelerates with higher levels of \"f\".\n\nSecondly, notice the other trends. It is probably intuitive that the within line variances decline to zero with continued inbreeding, and this is seen to be the case (both at the same linear rate \"(1-f)\" ). The amongst line variances both increase with inbreeding up to \"f = 0.5\", the \"genic variance\" at the rate of \"2f\", and the \"quasi-dominance variance\" at the rate of \"(f − f)\". At \"f > 0.5\", however, the trends change. The amongst line \"genic variance\" continues its linear increase until it equals the total \"genic variance\". But, the amongst line \"quasi-dominance variance\" now declines towards \"zero\", because \"(f − f)\" also declines with \"f > 0.5\".\n\nRecall that when \"f=1\", heterozygosity is zero, within-line variance is zero, and all genotypic variance is thus \"amongst-line\" variance and deplete of dominance variance. In other words, σ is the variance amongst fully inbred line means. Recall further [from \"The mean after self-fertilization\" section] that such means (G's, in fact) are G = a(p-q). Substituting \"(1-q)\" for the \"p\", gives G = a (1 − 2q) = a − 2aq. Therefore, the σ is the σ actually. Now, in general, the \"variance of a difference (x-y)\" is [ σ + σ − 2 cov ]. Therefore, σ = [ σ + σ − 2 cov ] . But a (an allele \"effect\") and q (an allele \"frequency\") are \"independent\"—so this covariance is zero. Furthermore, a is a constant from one line to the next, so σ is also zero. Further, 2a is another constant (k), so the σ is of the type \"σ\". In general, the variance \"σ\" is equal to k σ . Putting all this together reveals that σ = (2a) σ . Recall [from the section on \"Continued genetic drift\"] that \"σ = pq f \". With \"f=1\" here within this present derivation, this becomes \"pq 1\" (that is pq), and this is substituted into the previous.\n\nThe final result is: σ = σ = 4a pq = 2(2pq a) = 2 σ .\n\nIt follows immediately that f\" σ = \"f\" 2 σ . [This last \"f\" comes from the \"initial Sewall Wright equation\" : it is not\" the \"f \" just set to \"1\" in the derivation concluded two lines above.]\n\nPrevious sections found that the within line \"genic variance\" is based upon the \"substitution-derived\" genic variance ( σ )—but the \"amongst line\" \"genic variance\" is based upon the \"gene model\" allelic variance ( σ ). These two cannot simply be added to get \"total genic variance\". One approach in avoiding this problem was to re-visit the derivation of the \"average allele substitution effect\", and to construct a version, ( β ), that incorporates the effects of the dispersion. Crow and Kimura achieved this using the re-centered allele effects (a•, d•, (-a)• ) discussed previously [\"Gene effects re-defined\"]. However, this was found subsequently to under-estimate slightly the \"total Genic variance\", and a new variance-based derivation led to a refined version.\nThe \"refined\" version is: β = { a + [(1−\"f\" ) / (1 + \"f\" )] 2(q − p ) ad + [(1-\"f\" ) / (1 + \"f\" )] (q − p ) d } \n\nConsequently, σ = (1 + \"f\" ) 2pq β does now agree with [ (1-f) σ + 2f σ ] exactly.\n\nThe \"total genic variance\" is of intrinsic interest in its own right. But, prior to the refinements by Gordon, it had had another important use as well. There had been no extant estimators for the \"dispersed\" quasi-dominance. This had been estimated as the difference between Sewall Wright's \"inbred genotypic variance\" and the total \"dispersed\" genic variance [see the previous sub-section]. An anomaly appeared, however, because the \"total quasi-dominance variance\" appeared to increase early in inbreeding despite the decline in heterozygosity. \n\nThe refinements in the previous sub-section corrected this anomaly. At the same time, a direct solution for the \"total quasi-dominance variance\" was obtained, thus avoiding the need for the \"subtraction\" method of previous times. Furthermore, direct solutions for the \"amongst-line\" and \"within-line\" partitions of the \"quasi-dominance variance\" were obtained also, for the first time. [These have been presented in the section \"Dispersion and the genotypic variance\".]\n\nThe environmental variance is phenotypic variability, which cannot be ascribed to genetics. This sounds simple, but the experimental design needed to separate the two needs very careful planning. Even the \"external\" environment can be divided into spatial and temporal components (\"Sites\" and \"Years\"); or into partitions such as \"litter\" or \"family\", and \"culture\" or \"history\". These components are very dependent upon the actual experimental model used to do the research. Such issues are very important when doing the research itself, but in this article on quantitative genetics this overview may suffice.\n\nIt is an appropriate place, however, for a summary:\n\nPhenotypic variance = genotypic variances + environmental variances + genotype-environment interaction + experimental \"error\" variance\n\ni.e., σ² = σ² + σ² + σ² + σ²\n\n\" or\" σ² = σ² + σ² + σ² + σ² + σ² + σ²\n\nafter partitioning the genotypic variance (G) into component variances \"genic\" (A), \"quasi-dominance\" (D), and \"epistatic\" (I).\n\nThe Environmental variance will appear in other sections, such as \"Heritability\" and \"Correlated attributes\".\n\nThe heritability of a trait is the proportion of the total (phenotypic) variance (σ ) that is attributable to genetic variance, whether it be the full genotypic variance, or some component of it. It quantifies the degree to which phenotypic variability is due to genetics: but the precise meaning depends upon which genetical variance partition is used in the numerator of the proportion. Research estimates of heritability have standard errors, just as have all estimated statistics.\n\nWhere the numerator variance is the whole Genotypic variance ( σ ), the heritability is known as the \"broadsense\" heritability (\"H\"). It quantifies the degree to which variability in an attribute is determined by genetics as a whole. formula_111 [See section on the Genotypic variance.]\n\nIf only Genic variance (σ) is used in the numerator, the heritability may be called \"narrow sense\" (h). It quantifies the extent to which phenotypic variance is determined by Fisher's \"substitution expectations\" variance. formula_112Fisher proposed that this narrow-sense heritability might be appropriate in considering the results of natural selection, focusing as it does on change-ability, \"that is\" upon \"adaptation\". He proposed it with regard to quantifying Darwinian evolution.\n\nRecalling that the allelic variance (\"σ \") and the dominance variance (\"σ \") are eu-genetic components of the gene-model [see section on the Genotypic variance], and that \"σ \" (the \"substitution deviations\" or \" \"quasi-dominance\" \" variance) and \"cov\" are due to changing from the homozygote midpoint (mp) to the population mean (G), it can be seen that the real meanings of these heritabilities are obscure. The heritabilities formula_113 and formula_114 have unambiguous meaning.\n\nNarrow-sense heritability has been used also for predicting generally the results of artificial selection. In the latter case, however, the broadsense heritability may be more appropriate, as the whole attribute is being altered: not just adaptive capacity. Generally, advance from selection is more rapid the higher the heritability. [See section on \"Selection\".] In animals, heritability of reproductive traits is typically low, while heritability of disease resistance and production are moderately low to moderate, and heritability of body conformation is high.\n\nRepeatability (r) is the proportion of phenotypic variance attributable to differences in repeated measures of the same subject, arising from later records. It is used particularly for long-lived species. This value can only be determined for traits that manifest multiple times in the organism's lifetime, such as adult body mass, metabolic rate or litter size. Individual birth mass, for example, would not have a repeatability value: but it would have a heritability value. Generally, but not always, repeatability indicates the upper level of the heritability.\n\nr = (s² + s²)/s²\n\nwhere s² = phenotype-environment interaction = repeatability.\n\nThe above concept of repeatability is, however, problematic for traits that necessarily change greatly between measurements. For example, body mass increases greatly in many organisms between birth and adult-hood. Nonetheless, within a given age range (or life-cycle stage), repeated measures could be done, and repeatability would be meaningful within that stage.\n\nFrom the heredity perspective, relations are individuals that inherited genes from one or more common ancestors. Therefore, their \"relationship\" can be \"quantified\" on the basis of the probability that they each have inherited a copy of an allele from the common ancestor. In earlier sections, the \"Inbreeding coefficient\" has been defined as, \"the probability that two \"same\" alleles ( A and A, or a and a ) have a common origin\"—or, more formally, \"The probability that two homologous alleles are autozygous.\" Previously, the emphasis was on an individual's likelihood of having two such alleles, and the coefficient was framed accordingly. It is obvious, however, that this probability of autozygosity for an individual must also be the probability that each of its \"two parents\" had this autozygous allele. In this re-focused form, the probability is called the \"co-ancestry coefficient\" for the two individuals \"i\" and \"j\" ( \"f\" ). In this form, it can be used to quantify the relationship between two individuals, and may also be known as the \"coefficient of kinship\" or the \"consanguinity coefficient\". \n\n\"Pedigrees\" are diagrams of familial connections between individuals and their ancestors, and possibly between other members of the group that share genetical inheritance with them. They are relationship maps. A pedigree can be analyzed, therefore, to reveal coefficients of inbreeding and co-ancestry. Such pedigrees actually are informal depictions of \"path diagrams\" as used in \"path analysis\", which was invented by Sewall Wright when he formulated his studies on inbreeding. Using the adjacent diagram, the probability that individuals \"B\" and \"C\" have received autozygous alleles from ancestor \"A\" is \"1/2\" (one out of the two diploid alleles). This is the \"de novo\" inbreeding (Δf) at this step. However, the other allele may have had \"carry-over\" autozygosity from previous generations, so the probability of this occurring is (\"de novo complement\" multiplied by the \"inbreeding of ancestor A\" ), that is (1 − Δf ) f = (1/2) f . Therefore, the total probability of autozygosity in B and C, following the bi-furcation of the pedigree, is the sum of these two components, namely (1/2) + (1/2)f = (1/2) (1+f ) . This can be viewed as the probability that two random gametes from ancestor A carry autozygous alleles, and in that context is called the \"coefficient of parentage\" ( f ). It appears often in the following paragraphs.\n\nFollowing the \"B\" path, the probability that any autozygous allele is \"passed on\" to each successive parent is again (1/2) at each step (including the last one to the \"target\" X ). The overall probability of transfer down the \"B path\" is therefore (1/2) . The power that (1/2) is raised to can be viewed as \"the number of intermediates in the path between A and X \", n = 3 . Similarly, for the \"C path\", n = 2 , and the \"transfer probability\" is (1/2) . The combined probability of autozygous transfer from A to X is therefore [ f (1/2) (1/2) ] . Recalling that \" f = (1/2) (1+f ) \", f = f = (1/2) (1 + f ) . In this example, assuming that f = 0, f = 0.0156 (rounded) = f , one measure of the \"relatedness\" between P and Q.\n\nIn this section, powers of (1/2) were used to represent the \"probability of autozygosity\". Later, this same method will be used to represent the proportions of ancestral gene-pools which are inherited down a pedigree [the section on \"Relatedness between relatives\"].\n\nIn the following sections on sib-crossing and similar topics, a number of \"averaging rules\" are useful. These derive from path analysis. The rules show that any co-ancestry coefficient can be obtained as the average of \"cross-over co-ancestries\" between appropriate grand-parental and parental combinations. Thus, referring to the adjacent diagram, \"Cross-multiplier 1\" is that f = average of ( f , f , f , f ) = (1/4) [f + f + f + f ] = f . In a similar fashion, \"cross-multiplier 2\" states that f = (1/2) [ f + f ]—while \"cross-multiplier 3\" states that f = (1/2) [ f + f ] . Returning to the first multiplier, it can now be seen also to be f = (1/2) [ f + f ], which, after substituting multipliers 2 and 3, resumes its original form.\n\nIn much of the following, the grand-parental generation is referred to as (t-2) , the parent generation as (t-1) , and the \"target\" generation as t.\n\nThe diagram to the right shows that \"full sib crossing\" is a direct application of \"cross-Multiplier 1\", with the slight modification that \"parents A and B\" repeat (in lieu of \"C and D\") to indicate that individuals \"P1\" and \"P2\" have both of \"their\" parents in common—that is they are \"full siblings\". Individual Y is the result of the crossing of two full siblings. Therefore, f = f = (1/4) [ f + 2 f + f ] . Recall that f and f were defined earlier (in Pedigree analysis) as \"coefficients of parentage\", equal to \" (1/2)[1+f ] \" and \" (1/2)[1+f ] \" respectively, in the present context. Recognize that, in this guise, the grandparents \"A\" and \"B\" represent \"generation (t-2) \". Thus, assuming that in any one generation all levels of inbreeding are the same, these two \"coefficients of parentage \" each represent (1/2) [1 + f ] . Now, examine f . Recall that this also is \"f \" or \"f \", and so represents \"their \" generation - f . Putting it all together, f = (1/4) [ 2 f + 2 f ] = (1/4) [ 1 + f + 2 f ] . That is the \"inbreeding coefficient \" for \"Full-Sib crossing\" . The graph to the left shows the rate of this inbreeding over twenty repetitive generations. The \"repetition\" means that the progeny after cycle t become the crossing parents that generate cycle (t+1 ), and so on successively. The graphs also show the inbreeding for \"random fertilization 2N=20\" for comparison. Recall that this inbreeding coefficient for progeny \"Y\" is also the \"co-ancestry coefficient\" for its parents, and so is a measure of the \"relatedness of the two Fill siblings\".\n\nDerivation of the \"half sib crossing\" takes a slightly different path to that for Full sibs. In the adjacent diagram, the two half-sibs at generation (t-1) have only one parent in common—parent \"A\" at generation (t-2). The \"cross-multiplier 1\" is used again, giving f = f = (1/4) [ f + f + f + f ] . There is just one \"coefficient of parentage\" this time, but three \"co-ancestry coefficients\" at the (t-2) level (one of them—f—being a \"dummy\" and not representing an actual individual in the (t-1) generation). As before, the \"coefficient of parentage\" is (1/2)[1+f ] , and the three \"co-ancestries\" each represent f . Recalling that \" f \" represents \" f \", the final gathering and simplifying of terms gives f = f = (1/8) [ 1 + f + 6 f ] . The graphs at left include this \"half-sib (HS) inbreeding\" over twenty successive generations. As before, this also quantifies the \"relatedness\" of the two half-sibs at generation (t-1) in its alternative form of f .\n\nA pedigree diagram for selfing is on the right. It is so straightforward it doesn't require any cross-multiplication rules. It employs just the basic juxtaposition of the \"inbreeding coefficient\" and its alternative the \"co-ancestry coefficient\"; followed by recognizing that, in this case, the latter is also a \"coefficient of parentage\". Thus, f = f = f = (1/2) [ 1 + f ] . This is the fastest rate of inbreeding of all types, as can be seen in the graphs above. The selfing curve is, in fact, a graph of the \"coefficient of parentage\".\n\nThese are derived with methods similar to those for siblings. As before, the \"co-ancestry\" viewpoint of the \"inbreeding coefficient\" provides a measure of \"relatedness\" between the parents P1 and P2 in these cousin expressions.\n\nThe pedigree for \"First Cousins (FC)\" is given to the right. The prime equation is f = f = f = (1/4) [ f + f + f + f ]. After substitution with corresponding inbreeding coefficients, gathering of terms and simplifying, this becomes f = (1/4) [ 3 f + (1/4) [2 f + f + 1 ]] , which is a version for iteration—useful for observing the general pattern, and for computer programming. A \"final\" version is f = (1/16) [ 12 f + 2 f + f + 1 ] . \n\nThe \"Second Cousins (SC)\" pedigree is on the left. Parents in the pedigree not related to the \"common Ancestor\" are indicated by numerals instead of letters. Here, the prime equation is f = f = f = (1/4) [ f + f + f + f ]. After working through the appropriate algebra, this becomes f = (1/4) [ 3 f + (1/4) [3 f + (1/4) [2 f + f + 1 ]]] , which is the iteration version. A \"final\" version is f = (1/64) [ 48 f + 12 f + 2 f + f + 1 ] . \n\nTo visualize the \"pattern in full cousin\" equations, start the series with the \"full sib\" equation re-written in iteration form: f = (1/4)[2 f + f + 1 ]. Notice that this is the \"essential plan\" of the last term in each of the cousin iterative forms: with the small difference that the generation indices increment by \"1\" at each cousin \"level\". Now, define the \"cousin level\" as k = 1 (for First cousins), = 2 (for Second cousins), = 3 (for Third cousins), etc., etc.; and = 0 (for Full Sibs, which are \"zero level cousins\"). The \"last term\" can be written now as: (1/4) [ 2 f + f + 1] . Stacked in front of this \"last term\" are one or more \"iteration increments\" in the form (1/4) [ 3 f + ... , where j is the \"iteration index\" and takes values from 1 ... k over the successive iterations as needed. Putting all this together provides a general formula for all levels of \"full cousin\" possible, including \"Full Sibs\". For kth \"level\" full cousins, f{k} = \"Ιter\" { (1/4) [ 3 f + } + (1/4) [ 2 f + f + 1] . At the commencement of iteration, all f are set at \"0\", and each has its value substituted as it is calculated through the generations. The graphs to the right show the successive inbreeding for several levels of Full Cousins. \nFor \"first half-cousins (FHC)\", the pedigree is to the left. Notice there is just one common ancestor (individual A). Also, as for \"second cousins\", parents not related to the common ancestor are indicated by numerals. Here, the prime equation is f = f = f = (1/4) [ f + f + f + f ]. After working through the appropriate algebra, this becomes f = (1/4) [ 3 f + (1/8) [6 f + f + 1 ]] , which is the iteration version. A \"final\" version is f = (1/32) [ 24 f + 6 f + f + 1 ] . The iteration algorithm is similar to that for \"full cousins\", except that the last term is (1/8) [ 6 f + f + 1 ] . Notice that this last term is basically similar to the half sib equation, in parallel to the pattern for full cousins and full sibs. In other words, half sibs are \"zero level\" half cousins.\n\nThere is a tendency to regard cousin crossing with a human-oriented point of view, possibly because of a wide interest in Genealogy. The use of pedigrees to derive the inbreeding perhaps reinforces this \"Family History\" view. However, such kinds of inter-crossing occur also in natural populations—especially those that are sedentary, or have a \"breeding area\" that they re-visit from season to season. The progeny-group of a harem with a dominant male, for example, may contain elements of sib-crossing, cousin crossing, and backcrossing, as well as genetic drift, especially of the \"island\" type. In addition to that, the occasional \"outcross\" adds an element of hybridization to the mix. It is \"not\" panmixia.\n\nFollowing the hybridizing between A and R, the F1 (individual B) is crossed back (BC1) to an original parent (R) to produce the BC1 generation (individual C). [It is usual to use the same label for the act of \"making\" the back-cross \"and\" for the generation produced by it. The act of back-crossing is here in \"italics\". ] Parent R is the \"recurrent\" parent. Two successive backcrosses are depicted, with individual D being the BC2 generation. These generations have been given \"t\" indices also, as indicated. As before, f = f = f = (1/2) [ f + f ] , using \"cross-multiplier 2\" previously given. The \"f\" just defined is the one that involves generation \"(t-1)\" with \"(t-2)\". However, there is another such \"f\" contained wholly \"within\" generation \"(t-2)\" as well, and it is \"this\" one that is used now: as the \"co-ancestry\" of the \"parents\" of individual C in generation \"(t-1)\". As such, it is also the \"inbreeding coefficient\" of C, and hence is f. The remaining f is the \"coefficient of parentage\" of the \"recurrent parent\", and so is \"(1/2) [1 + f ] \". Putting all this together : f = (1/2) [ (1/2) [ 1 + f ] + f ] = (1/4) [ 1 + f + 2 f ] . The graphs at right illustrate Backcross inbreeding over twenty backcrosses for three different levels of (fixed) inbreeding in the Recurrent parent.\n\nThis routine is commonly used in Animal and Plant Breeding programmes. Often after making the hybrid (especially if individuals are short-lived), the recurrent parent needs separate \"line breeding\" for its maintenance as a future recurrent parent in the backcrossing. This maintenance may be through selfing, or through full-sib or half-sib crossing, or through restricted randomly fertilized populations, depending on the species' reproductive possibilities. Of course, this incremental rise in f carries-over into the f of the backcrossing. The result is a more gradual curve rising to the asymptotes than shown in the present graphs, because the \"f\" is not at a fixed level from the outset.\n\nIn the section on \"Pedigree analysis\", formula_115 was used to represent probabilities of autozygous allele descent over n generations down branches of the pedigree. This formula arose because of the rules imposed by sexual reproduction: (i) two parents contributing virtually equal shares of autosomal genes, and (ii) successive dilution for each generation between the zygote and the \"focus\" level of parentage. These same rules apply also to any other viewpoint of descent in a two-sex reproductive system. One such is the proportion of any ancestral gene-pool (also known as ‘germplasm’) which is contained within any zygote’s genotype.\n\nTherefore, the proportion of an ancestral genepool in a genotype is:\nformula_116 \nwhere n = number of sexual generations between the zygote and the focus ancestor.\n\nFor example, each parent defines a genepool contributing formula_117 to its offspring; while each great-grandparent contributes formula_118 to its great-grand-offspring.\n\nThe zygote's total genepool (Γ) is, of course, the sum of the sexual contributions to its descent.\nformula_119\n\nIndividuals descended from a common ancestral genepool obviously are related. This is not to say they are identical in their genes (alleles), because, at each level of ancestor, segregation and assortment will have occurred in producing gametes. But they will have originated from the same pool of alleles available for these meioses and subsequent fertilizations. [This idea was encountered firstly in the sections on pedigree analysis and relationships.] The genepool contributions [see section above] of their nearest common ancestral genepool(an \"ancestral node\") can therefore be used to define their relationship. This leads to an intuitive definition of relationship which conforms well with familiar notions of \"relatedness\" found in family-history; and permits comparisons of the \"degree of relatedness\" for complex patterns of relations arising from such genealogy.\n\nThe only modifications necessary (for each individual in turn) are in Γ and are due to the shift to \"shared common ancestry\" rather than \"individual total ancestry\". For this, define Ρ (in lieu of Γ) ; m = number of ancestors-in-common at the node (i.e. m = 1 or 2 only) ; and an \"individual index\" k. Thus:\n\nformula_120\n\nwhere, as before, \"n = number of sexual generations\" between the individual and the ancestral node.\n\nAn example is provided by two first full-cousins. Their nearest common ancestral node is their grandparents which gave rise to their two sibling parents, and they have both of these grandparents in common. [See earlier pedigree.] For this case, \"m=2\" and \"n=2\", so for each of them\n\nformula_121\n\nIn this simple case, each cousin has numerically the same Ρ .\n\nA second example might be between two full cousins, but one (\"k=1\") has three generations back to the ancestral node (n=3), and the other (\"k=2\") only two (n=2) [i.e. a second and first cousin relationship]. For both, m=2 (they are full cousins).\n\nformula_122\n\nand\n\nformula_123\n\nNotice each cousin has a different Ρ .\n\nIn any pairwise relationship estimation, there is one Ρ for each individual: it remains to average them in order to combine them into a single \"Relationship coefficient\". Because each \"Ρ\" is a fraction of a total genepool, the appropriate average for them is the \"geometric mean\" This average is their Genepool Relationship Coefficient—the \"GRC\".\n\nFor the first example (two full first-cousins), their GRC = 0.5; for the second case (a full first and second cousin), their GRC = 0.3536. \nAll of these relationships (GRC) are applications of path-analysis. A summary of some levels of relationship (GRC) follow.\n\nThese, in like manner to the Genotypic variances, can be derived through either the gene-model (\"Mather\") approach or the allele-substitution (\"Fisher\") approach. Here, each method is demonstrated for alternate cases.\n\nThese can be viewed either as the covariance between any offspring and \"any one\" of its parents (PO), or as the covariance between any offspring and the \" \"mid-parent\" \" value of both its parents (MPO).\n\nThis can be derived as the \"sum of cross-products\" between parent gene-effects and \"one-half\" of the progeny expectations using the allele-substitution approach. The \"one-half\" of the progeny expectation accounts for the fact that \"only one of the two parents\" is being considered. The appropriate parental gene-effects are therefore the second-stage redefined gene effects used to define the genotypic variances earlier, that is: a″ = 2q(a − qd) and d″ = (q-p)a + 2pqd and also (-a)″ = -2p(a + pd) [see section \"Gene effects redefined\"]. Similarly, the appropriate progeny effects, for allele-substitution expectations are one-half of the earlier \"breeding values\", the latter being: a = 2qa, and a = (q-p)a and also a = -2pa [see section on \"Genotype substitution – Expectations and Deviations\"].\n\nBecause all of these effects are defined already as deviates from the genotypic mean, the cross-product sum using {genotype-frequency * parental gene-effect * half-breeding-value} immediately provides the \"allele-substitution-expectation covariance\" between any one parent and its offspring. After careful gathering of terms and simplification, this becomes cov(PO) = pqa = ½ s . \n\nUnfortunately, the \"allele-substitution-deviations\" are usually overlooked, but they have not \"ceased to exist\" nonetheless! Recall that these deviations are: d = -2q d, and d = 2pq d and also d = -2p d [see section on \"Genotype substitution – Expectations and Deviations\"]. Consequently, the cross-product sum using {genotype-frequency * parental gene-effect * half-substitution-deviations} also immediately provides the allele-substitution-deviations covariance between any one parent and its offspring. Once more, after careful gathering of terms and simplification, this becomes cov(PO) = 2pqd = ½ s .\n\nIt follows therefore that: cov(PO) = cov(PO) + cov(PO) = ½ s + ½ s , when dominance is \"not\" overlooked !\n\nBecause there are many combinations of parental genotypes, there are many different mid-parents and offspring means to consider, together with the varying frequencies of obtaining each parental pairing. The gene-model approach is the most expedient in this case. Therefore, an \"unadjusted sum of cross-products (USCP)\"—using all products { parent-pair-frequency * mid-parent-gene-effect * offspring-genotype-mean }—is adjusted by subtracting the {overall genotypic mean} as \"correction factor\" (CF). After multiplying out all the various combinations, carefully gathering terms, simplifying, factoring and cancelling-out where applicable, this becomes:\n\ncov(MPO) = pq [a + (q-p)d ] = pq a = ½ s , with no dominance having been overlooked in this case, as it had been used-up in defining the a. \n\nThe most obvious application is an experiment that contains all parents and their offspring, with or without reciprocal crosses, preferably replicated without bias, enabling estimation of all appropriate means, variances and covariances, together with their standard errors. These estimated statistics can then be used to estimate the genetic variances. Twice \"the difference between the estimates of the two forms of (corrected) parent-offspring covariance\" provides an estimate of s; and twice the \"cov(MPO)\" estimates s. With appropriate experimental design and analysis, standard errors can be obtained for these genetical statistics as well. This is the basic core of an experiment known as \"Diallel analysis\", the Mather, Jinks and Hayman version of which is discussed in another section.\n\nA second application involves using \"regression analysis\", which estimates from statistics the ordinate (Y-estimate), derivative (regression coefficient) and constant (Y-intercept) of calculus. The \"regression coefficient\" estimates the \"rate of change\" of the function predicting Y from X, based on minimizing the residuals between the fitted curve and the observed data (MINRES). No alternative method of estimating such a function satisfies this basic requirement of MINRES. In general, the regression coefficient is estimated as \"the ratio of the covariance(XY) to the variance of the determinator (X)\". In practice, the sample size is usually the same for both X and Y, so this can be written as SCP(XY) / SS(X), where all terms have been defined previously. In the present context, the parents are viewed as the \"determinative variable\" (X), and the offspring as the \"determined variable\" (Y), and the regression coefficient as the \"functional relationship\" (ß) between the two. Taking cov(MPO) = ½ s as cov(XY), and s / 2 (the variance of the mean of two parents—the mid-parent) as s, it can be seen that ß = [½ s] / [½ s] = h . Next, utilizing cov(PO) = [ ½ s + ½ s ] as cov(XY), and s as s, it is seen that 2 ß = [ 2 (½ s + ½ s )] / s = H .\n\nAnalysis of \"epistasis\" has previously been attempted via an \"interaction variance\" approach of the type \" s \", and \" s\" and also \" s\". This has been integrated with these present covariances in an effort to provide estimators for the epistasis variances. However, the findings of epigenetics suggest that this may not be an appropriate way to define epistasis.\n\nCovariance between half-sibs (HS) is defined easily using allele-substitution methods; but, once again, the dominance contribution has historically been omitted. However, as with the mid-parent/offspring covariance, the covariance between full-sibs (FS) requires a \"parent-combination\" approach, thereby necessitating the use of the gene-model corrected-cross-product method; and the dominance contribution has not historically been overlooked. The superiority of the gene-model derivations is as evident here as it was for the Genotypic variances.\n\nThe sum of the cross-products { common-parent frequency * half-breeding-value of one half-sib * half-breeding-value of any other half-sib in that same common-parent-group } immediately provides one of the required covariances, because the effects used [\"breeding values\"—representing the allele-substitution expectations] are already defined as deviates from the genotypic mean [see section on \"Allele substitution – Expectations and deviations\"]. After simplification. this becomes: cov(HS) = ½ pq a = ¼ s . However, the \"substitution deviations\" also exist, defining the sum of the cross-products { common-parent frequency * half-substitution-deviation of one half-sib * half-substitution-deviation of any other half-sib in that same common-parent-group }, which ultimately leads to: cov(HS) = p q d = ¼ s . Adding the two components gives:\n\ncov(HS) = cov(HS) + cov(HS) = ¼ s + ¼ s .\n\nAs explained in the introduction, a method similar to that used for mid-parent/progeny covariance is used. Therefore, an \"unadjusted sum of cross-products\" (USCP) using all products—{ parent-pair-frequency * the square of the offspring-genotype-mean }—is adjusted by subtracting the {overall genotypic mean} as \"correction factor (CF)\". In this case, multiplying out all combinations, carefully gathering terms, simplifying, factoring, and cancelling-out is very protracted. It eventually becomes:\n\ncov(FS) = pq a + p q d = ½ s + ¼ s , with no dominance having been overlooked. \n\nThe most useful application here for genetical statistics is the \"correlation between half-sibs\". Recall that the correlation coefficient (\"r\") is the ratio of the covariance to the variance [see section on \"Associated attributes\" for example]. Therefore, r = cov(HS) / s = [¼ s + ¼ s ] / s = ¼ H . The correlation between full-sibs is of little utility, being r = cov(FS) / s = [½ s + ¼ s ] / s . The suggestion that it \"approximates\" (\"½ h\") is poor advice.\n\nOf course, the correlations between siblings are of intrinsic interest in their own right, quite apart from any utility they may have for estimating heritabilities or genotypic variances.\n\nIt may be worth noting that [ cov(FS) − cov(HS)] = ¼ s . Experiments consisting of FS and HS families could utilize this by using intra-class correlation to equate experiment variance components to these covariances [see section on \"Coefficient of relationship as an intra-class correlation\" for the rationale behind this].\n\nThe earlier comments regarding epistasis apply again here [see section on \"Applications (Parent-offspring\"].\n\nSelection operates on the attribute (phenotype), such that individuals that equal or exceed a selection threshold (z) become effective parents for the next generation. The \"proportion\" they represent of the base population is the \"selection pressure\". The \"smaller\" the proportion, the \"stronger\" the pressure. The \"mean of the selected group\" (P) is superior to the \"base-population mean\" (P) by the difference called the \"selection differential (S)\". All these quantities are phenotypic. To \"link\" to the underlying genes, a \"heritability\" (h) is used, fulfilling the role of a \"coefficient of determination\" in the biometrical sense. The \"expected genetical change\"—still expressed in \"phenotypic units of measurement\"—is called the \"genetic advance (ΔG)\", and is obtained by the product of the \"selection differential (S)\" and its \"coefficient of determination\" (h). The expected \"mean of the progeny\" (P) is found by adding the \"genetic advance (ΔG)\" to the \"base mean (P)\". The graphs to the right show how the (initial) genetic advance is greater with stronger selection pressure (smaller \"probability\"). They also show how progress from successive cycles of selection (even at the same selection pressure) steadily declines, because the Phenotypic variance and the Heritability are being diminished by the selection itself. This is discussed further shortly.\nThus formula_124. \nand formula_125. \n\nThe \"narrow-sense heritability (h)\" is usually used, thereby linking to the \"genic variance (σ) \". However, if appropriate, use of the \"broad-sense heritability (H)\" would connect to the \"genotypic variance (σ)\" ; and even possibly an \"allelic heritability [ h = (σ) / (σ) ]\" might be contemplated, connecting to (σ ). [See section on Heritability.]\n\nTo apply these concepts \"before\" selection actually takes place, and so predict the outcome of alternatives (such as choice of \"selection threshold\", for example), these phenotypic statistics are re-considered against the properties of the Normal Distribution, especially those concerning truncation of the \"superior tail\" of the Distribution. In such consideration, the \"standardized\" selection differential (i)″ and the \"standardized\" selection threshold (z)″ are used instead of the previous \"phenotypic\" versions. The phenotypic standard deviate (σ) is also needed. This is described in a subsequent section.\n\nTherefore, ΔG = (i σ) h, where \"(i σ)\" = \"S\" previously. \n\nThe text above noted that successive ΔG declines because the \"input\" [the phenotypic variance ( σ )] is reduced by the previous selection. The heritability also is reduced. The graphs to the left show these declines over ten cycles of repeated selection during which the same selection pressure is asserted. The accumulated genetic advance (ΣΔG) has virtually reached its asymptote by generation 6 in this example. This reduction depends partly upon truncation properties of the Normal Distribution, and partly upon the heritability together with \"meiosis determination ( b )\". The last two items quantify the extent to which the \"truncation\" is \"offset\" by new variation arising from segregation and assortment during meiosis. This is discussed soon, but here note the simplified result for \"undispersed random fertilization (f = 0)\".\n\nThus : σ = σ [1 − i ( i-z) ½ h], where i ( i-z) = K = truncation coefficient and ½ h = R = reproduction coefficient This can be written also as σ = σ [1 − K R ], which facilitates more detailed analysis of selection problems.\n\nHere, i and z have already been defined, ½ is the \"meiosis determination (b) for f=0\", and the remaining symbol is the heritability. These are discussed further in following sections. Also notice that, more generally, R = b h. If the general meiosis determination ( b ) is used, the results of prior inbreeding can be incorporated into the selection. The phenotypic variance equation then becomes:\n\nσ = σ [1 − i ( i-z) b h].\n\nThe \"Phenotypic variance\" truncated by the \"selected group\" ( σ ) is simply σ [1 − K], and its contained \"genic variance\" is (h σ ). Assuming that selection has not altered the \"environmental\" variance, the \"genic variance\" for the progeny can be approximated by σ = ( σ − σ) . From this, h = ( σ / σ ). Similar estimates could be made for σ and H , or for σ and h if required.\n\nThe following rearrangement is useful for considering selection on multiple attributes (characters). It starts by expanding the heritability into its variance components. ΔG = i σ ( σ / σ ) . The \"σ\" and \"σ\" partially cancel, leaving a solo \"σ\". Next, the \"σ\" inside the heritability can be expanded as (\"σ × σ\"), which leads to :\n\nΔG = i σ ( σ / σ ) = i σ h .\n\nCorresponding re-arrangements could be made using the alternative heritabilities, giving ΔG = i σ H or ΔG = i σ h.\n\nThis traditional view of adaptation in quantitative genetics provides a model for how the selected phenotype changes over time, as a function of the selection differential and heritability. However it does not provide insight into (nor does it depend upon) any of the genetic details - in particular, the number of loci involved, their allele frequencies and effect sizes, and the frequency changes driven by selection. This, in contrast, is the focus of work on polygenic adaptation within the field of population genetics. Recent studies have shown that traits such as height have evolved in humans during the past few thousands of years as a result of small allele frequency shifts at thousands of variants that affect height.\n\nThe entire \"base population\" is outlined by the normal curve to the right. Along the Z axis is every value of the attribute from least to greatest, and the height from this axis to the curve itself is the frequency of the value at the axis below. The equation for finding these frequencies for the \"normal\" curve (the curve of \"common experience\") is given in the ellipse. Notice it includes the mean (µ) and the variance (σ). Moving infinitesimally along the z-axis, the frequencies of neighbouring values can be \"stacked\" beside the previous, thereby accumulating an area that represents the probability of obtaining all values within the stack. [That's integration from calculus.] Selection focuses on such a probability area, being the shaded-in one from the \"selection threshold (z)\" to the end of the superior tail of the curve. This is the \"selection pressure\". The selected group (the effective parents of the next generation) include all phenotype values from z to the \"end\" of the tail. The mean of the selected group is µ, and the difference between it and the base mean (µ) represents the selection differential (S). By taking partial integrations over curve-sections of interest, and some rearranging of the algebra, it can be shown that the \"selection differential\" is S = [ y (σ / Prob.)] , where y is the \"frequency\" of the value at the \"selection threshold\" z (the \"ordinate\" of \"z\"). Rearranging this relationship gives S / σ = y / Prob., the left-hand side of which is, in fact, \"selection differential divided by standard deviation\"—that is the \"standardized selection differential (i)\". The right-side of the relationship provides an \"estimator\" for i—the ordinate of the \"selection threshold\" divided by the \"selection pressure\". Tables of the Normal Distribution can be used, but tabulations of i itself are available also. The latter reference also gives values of i adjusted for small populations (400 and less), where \"quasi-infinity\" cannot be assumed (but \"was\" presumed in the \"Normal Distribution\" outline above). The \"standardized selection differential (i)\" is known also as the intensity of selection.\n\nFinally, a cross-link with the differing terminology in the previous sub-section may be useful: µ (here) = \"P\" (there), µ = \"P\" and σ = \"σ\".\n\nThe meiosis determination (b) is the \"coefficient of determination\" of meiosis, which is the cell-division whereby parents generate gametes. Following the principles of \"standardized partial regression\", of which path analysis is a pictorially oriented version, Sewall Wright analyzed the paths of gene-flow during sexual reproduction, and established the \"strengths of contribution\" (\"coefficients of determination\") of various components to the overall result. Path analysis includes \"partial correlations\" as well as \"partial regression coefficients\" (the latter are the \"path coefficients\"). Lines with a single arrow-head are directional \"determinative paths\", and lines with double arrow-heads are \"correlation connections\". Tracing various routes according to \"path analysis rules\" emulates the algebra of standardized partial regression.\n\nThe path diagram to the left represents this analysis of sexual reproduction. Of its interesting elements, the important one in the selection context is \"meiosis\". That's where segregation and assortment occur—the processes that partially ameliorate the truncation of the phenotypic variance that arises from selection. The path coefficients b are the meiosis paths. Those labeled a are the fertilization paths. The correlation between gametes from the same parent (g) is the \"meiotic correlation\". That between parents within the same generation is r. That between gametes from different parents (f) became known subsequently as the \"inbreeding coefficient\". The primes ( ' ) indicate generation (t-1), and the \"un\"primed indicate generation t. Here, some important results of the present analysis are given. Sewall Wright interpreted many in terms of inbreeding coefficients.\n\nThe meiosis determination (b) is \"½ (1+g)\" and equals ½ (1 + f) , implying that g = f. With non-dispersed random fertilization, f) = 0, giving b = ½, as used in the selection section above. However, being aware of its background, other fertilization patterns can be used as required. Another determination also involves inbreeding—the fertilization determination (a) equals 1 / [ 2 ( 1 + f ) ] . Also another correlation is an inbreeding indicator—r = 2 f / ( 1 + f ), also known as the \"coefficient of relationship\". [Do not confuse this with the \"coefficient of kinship\"—an alternative name for the \"co-ancestry coefficient\". See introduction to \"Relationship\" section.] This r re-occurs in the sub-section on dispersion and selection.\n\nThese links with inbreeding reveal interesting facets about sexual reproduction that are not immediately apparent. The graphs to the right plot the \"meiosis\" and \"syngamy (fertilization)\" coefficients of determination against the inbreeding coefficient. There it is revealed that as inbreeding increases, meiosis becomes more important (the coefficient increases), while syngamy becomes less important. The overall role of reproduction [the product of the previous two coefficients—r] remains the same. This \"increase in b\" is particularly relevant for selection because it means that the \"selection truncation of the Phenotypic variance\" is offset to a lesser extent during a sequence of selections when accompanied by inbreeding (which is frequently the case).\n\nThe previous sections treated \"dispersion\" as an \"assistant\" to \"selection\", and it became apparent that the two work well together. In quantitative genetics, selection is usually examined in this \"biometrical\" fashion, but the changes in the means (as monitored by ΔG) reflect the changes in allele and genotype frequencies beneath this surface. Referral to the section on \"Genetic drift\" brings to mind that it also effects changes in allele and genotype frequencies, and associated means; and that this is the companion aspect to the dispersion considered here (\"the other side of the same coin\"). However, these two forces of frequency change are seldom in concert, and may often act contrary to each other. One (selection) is \"directional\" being driven by selection pressure acting on the phenotype: the other (genetic drift) is driven by \"chance\" at fertilization (binomial probabilities of gamete samples). If the two tend towards the same allele frequency, their \"coincidence\" is the probability of obtaining that frequencies sample in the genetic drift: the likelihood of their being \"in conflict\", however, is the \"sum of probabilities of all the alternative frequency samples\". In extreme cases, a single syngamy sampling can undo what selection has achieved, and the probabilities of it happening are available. It is important to keep this in mind. However, genetic drift resulting in sample frequencies similar to those of the selection target does not lead to so drastic an outcome—instead slowing progress towards selection goals.\n\nUpon jointly observing two (or more) attributes (\"eg\" height and mass), it may be noticed that they vary together as genes or environments alter. This co-variation is measured by the covariance, which can be represented by \" cov \" or by θ. It will be positive if they vary together in the same direction; or negative if they vary together but in opposite direction. If the two attributes vary independently of each other, the covariance will be zero. The degree of association between the attributes is quantified by the correlation coefficient (symbol r or ρ ). In general, the correlation coefficient is the ratio of the \"covariance\" to the geometric mean of the two variances of the attributes. Observations usually occur at the phenotype, but in research they may also occur at the \"effective haplotype\" (effective gene product) [see Figure to the right]. Covariance and correlation could therefore be \"phenotypic\" or \"molecular\", or any other designation which an analysis model permits. The phenotypic covariance is the \"outermost\" layer, and corresponds to the \"usual\" covariance in Biometrics/Statistics. However, it can be partitioned by any appropriate research model in the same way as was the phenotypic variance. For every partition of the covariance, there is a corresponding partition of the correlation. Some of these partitions are given below. The first subscript (G, A, etc.) indicates the partition. The second-level subscripts (X, Y) are \"place-keepers\" for any two attributes.\n\nThe first example is the \"un-partitioned\" phenotype.\n\nThe genetical partitions (a) \"genotypic\" (overall genotype),(b) \"genic\" (substitution expectations) and (c) \"allelic\" (homozygote) follow.\n\n(a) formula_127\n\n(b) formula_128\n\n(c) formula_129\n\nWith an appropriately designed experiment, a \"non-genetical\" (environment) partition could be obtained also.\n\nThe metabolic pathways from gene to phenotype are complex and varied, but the causes of correlation amongst attributes lie within them. An outline is shown in the Figure to the right.\n\n\n\n", "id": "297382", "title": "Quantitative genetics"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2254890", "text": "Hypervariable\n\nHypervariable may refer to:\n\n", "id": "2254890", "title": "Hypervariable"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1825981", "text": "Triangle of U\n\nThe triangle of U is a theory about the evolution and relationships between members of the plant genus \"Brassica\". The theory states that the genomes of three ancestral species of \"Brassica\" combined to create three of the common modern vegetables and oilseed crop species. It has since been confirmed by studies of DNA and proteins.\n\nThe theory was first published in 1935 by Woo Jang-choon (Hangeul: 우장춘), a Korean-Japanese botanist who was working in Korea (where his name was Japanized as \"Nagaharu U\", the Japanese reading of his name). Woo made synthetic hybrids between the diploid and tetraploid species and examined how the chromosomes paired in the resulting triploids.\n\nThe triangle of U is illustrated by the accompanying triangular diagram. It shows how three of the \"Brassica\" species were derived from three ancestral genomes, denoted by the letters AA, BB, or CC. Alone, each of these diploid genomes produces a common \"Brassica\" species. The letter \"n\" denotes the number of chromosomes in each genome, and is the number found in the pollen or ovule. For example, \"Brassica rapa\" has an A − n=10 (alternatively AA − 2n=20) designation. That means each somatic cell of the plant contains two complete genome copies (diploid) and each genome has ten chromosomes. Thus, each cell will contain 20 chromosomes; since this is the diploid number, it is written as 2n = 2x = 20.\n\n\nThese three species exist as separate species, but because they are closely related, it was possible for them to interbreed. Unfortunately inbreeding within the species does not produce genomes that are resistant to unregulated contamination. This interspecific breeding allowed for the creation of three new species of tetraploid \"Brassica\". Because they are derived from the genomes of two different species, these hybrid plants are said to be allotetraploid (contain four genomes, derived from two different ancestral species). (More specifically, they are amphidiploid, i.e., containing one diploid genome from each of the two different \"Brassica\" species). Data from molecular studies indicate the three diploid species are themselves paleopolyploids.\n\n\n", "id": "1825981", "title": "Triangle of U"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1632644", "text": "Y linkage\n\nY linkage, which can also be known as sex linkage or holandric inheritance, affects traits that are located on the Y chromosome. Y linkage can be very hard to determine and prove. This is due in part because the Y chromosome is small and does not contain as many genes as autosomal genes or the X chromosome. However, the Y chromosome is no longer considered to be as barren as it once was; it is estimated to contain about 200 genes. The Y-chromosome is sex determining in some species but not others, so not all genes that play a role in sex determination are Y-linked. The Y-chromosome for the most part does not undergo genetic recombination; only small regions called the pseudoautosomal regions exhibit recombination. The majority of the Y-chromosome that does not recombine is called the \"non-recombining region\".\n\nFor a trait to exhibit Y-linkage it must follow three requirements: the trait occurs in males only, it reoccurs in all sons of affected males, and that the daughters of affected men are not only phenotypically normal but also do not have affected offspring. These requirements where established by the pioneer of Y-linkage, Curt Stern. Stern detailed in his paper a plethora of genes he suspected to be y-linked. His requirements at first made Y-linkage very hard to determine and prove. In the 1950s using human pedigrees, many genes were determined incorrectly to be Y-linked. This has led to new research with more advanced techniques and more complicated statistical analysis. Hairy ears is an example of a gene once thought to be Y-linked in humans; however, that hypothesis has been discredited. Due to advancements with sequencing, Y-Linkage is getting easier to determine and prove. The field of genomics will help advance this topic due to the fact that it is getting cheaper to sequence entire genomes. In recent years, the Y-chromosome has been almost entirely mapped revealing many traits that are y-linked.\n\nY-Linkage is similar but different than X-linkage; however, both are forms of sex linkage. X-linkage can be genetically linked and sex linked, while Y-linkage can only be genetically linked. This is because there is only one copy of the Y-chromosome in males. X-chromosomes have two copies, one from each parent and recombination can occur. The X-chromosome also contains more genes and the chromosome is substantially larger.\n\nSome traits are thought to be Y-linked but have not been confirmed. One example is hearing impairment. Hearing impairment was tracked in one specific family and through seven generations all males were affected by this trait. However, this trait has only occurred very rarely and has not been entirely confirmed or disproved.\n\nIn guppies, Y-linked genes help determine sex selection. This is done indirectly by traits that allow the guppy to appear more attractive to a prospective mate. These traits were shown to be on the Y-chromosome and thus Y-linked. Also in guppies, it appears that the four measures of sexual activity is Y-linked.\n\nY-Chromosome deletions are a frequent genetic cause of male infertility.\n\nHypertension or high blood pressure appears to be Y-linked in the hypertensive rat. One of the loci was autosomal however a second component of this trait appeared to be Y-linked. This stayed true in the third generation of rats as well as the second. Male offspring with a hypertensive father had significantly higher blood pressure than male offspring with a hypertensive mother indicating a component of the trait being Y-linked. The results were not the same in females as in males further symbolizing it having a Y-component. This research could have implications in helping fight blood pressure in human males. This is useful in genomics due to the fact that if the gene can be sequenced it may be possible to determine if a person will develop hypersensitivity before they actually do.\n\nMany genes were at once thought to be Y-linked traits, including hairy ears. The discussion on whether Hairy Ears are a y-linked trait has been a debated issue in recent papers on Y-linkage. The primary analysis was that Hairy Ears were a y-linked trait. However, that paper was done through pedigrees and visual observations and has since been debunked. Since then, a paper has emerged using sequencing to determine the validity of the original paper. This paper used DNA Sequencing and binary markers to determine statistically that there was no correlation between individuals with hairy ears and individuals without hairy ears. This proved that hairy ears were not a Y-linked trait. Genomics and sequencing allowed for the final determination that this trait is not Y-linked. Without DNA-mini-seqs and other methods it would have proved impossible to settle this argument. Sequencing was a way to statistically disprove what pedigrees only showed.\n\nIn general, traits that exist on the Y chromosome are Y-linked because they only occur on that chromosome and do not change in recombination.\n\nAs of the year 2000, a number of genes were known to be Y-linked, including:\n\n\n", "id": "1632644", "title": "Y linkage"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2774047", "text": "Transvection (genetics)\n\nTransvection is an epigenetic phenomenon that results from an interaction between an allele on one chromosome and the corresponding allele on the homologous chromosome. Transvection can lead to either gene activation or repression. It can also occur between nonallelic regions of the genome as well as regions of the genome that are not transcribed.\n\nThe first observation of mitotic (i.e. non-meiotic) chromosome pairing was discovered via microscopy in 1908 by Nettie Stevens.\nEdward B. Lewis at Caltech discovered transvection at the bithorax complex in Drosophila in the 1950s. Since then, transvection has been observed at a number of additional loci in Drosophila, including white, decapentaplegic, eyes absent, vestigial, and yellow.\n\nTransvection appears to be dependent upon chromosome pairing. In some cases, if one allele is placed on a different chromosome by a translocation, transvection does not occur. Transvection can sometimes be restored in a translocation homozygote, where both alleles may once again be able to pair. Restoration of phenotype has been observed at bithorax, decapentaplegic, eyes absent, and vestigial, and with transgenes of white. In some cases, transvection between two alleles leads to intragenic complementation while disruption of transvection disrupts the complementation.\n\nTransvection is believed to occur through a variety of mechanisms. In one mechanism, the enhancers of one allele activate the promoter of a paired second allele. Other mechanisms include pairing-sensitive silencing and enhancer bypass of a chromatin insulator through pairing-mediated changes in gene structure.\n\n", "id": "2774047", "title": "Transvection (genetics)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2773777", "text": "Paramutation\n\nIn epigenetics, a paramutation is an interaction between two alleles at a single locus, whereby one allele induces a heritable change in the other allele. The change may be in the pattern of DNA methylation or histone modifications. The allele inducing the change is said to be paramutagenic, while the allele that has been epigenetically altered is termed paramutable. A paramutable allele may have altered levels of gene expression, which may continue in offspring which inherit that allele, even though the paramutagenic allele may no longer be present. Through proper breeding, paramutation can result in sibling plants that have the same genetic sequence, but with drastically different phenotypes.\n\nThough studied primarily in maize, paramutation has been described in a number of other systems, including animal systems like \"Drosophila melanogaster\" and mice. Despite its broad distribution, examples of this phenomenon are scarce and its mechanism is not fully understood.\n\nThe first description of what would come to be called paramutation was given by William Bateson and Caroline Pellew in 1915, when they described \"rogue\" peas that always passed their \"rogue\" phenotype onto their progeny. However, the first formal description of paramutation was given by R.A. Brink at the University of Wisconsin–Madison in the 1950s, who did his work in maize (\"Zea mays\"). Brink noticed that specific weakly expressed alleles of the \"red1\" \"(r1)\" locus in maize, which encodes a transcription factor that confers red pigment to corn kernels, can heritably change specific strongly expressed alleles to a weaker expression state. The weaker expression state adopted by the changed allele is heritable and can, in turn, change the expression state of other active alleles in a process termed secondary paramutation. Brink showed that the influence of the paramutagenic allele could persist for many generations.\n\nThe alleles that cause heritable changes in the alleles they come into contact with are called paramutagenic, and the alleles modified by them are paramutable. Alleles that do not take part in this interaction are called neutral. When present together in an organism, the paramutable allele is converted to the paramutagenic allele, and retains its paramutagenicity in subsequent generations. No change in DNA sequence accompanies this transformation, but instead epigenetic modifications (e.g. DNA methylation) differentiate the paramutagenic from paramutable alleles. In most cases, it is the paramutable allele that is highly transcribed and the paramutagenic allele that undergoes little to no transcription.\n\nThe first described and most extensively researched example is the \"r1\" locus in maize. The gene at this locus, when actively transcribed, codes for a transcription factor that promotes anthocyanin production, resulting in kernels with a purple color. One allele at this locus, referred to as B’, is capable of causing methylation at the other allele, B-I. This methylation results in reduced transcription and, as a result, decreased anthocyanin production. These alleles do not differ in DNA sequence, but they do differ in their degree of DNA methylation. As with other examples of paramutation, this change of the B-I allele to the B’ allele is stable and heritable. Other, similar examples of paramutation exist at other maize loci, as well as in other plants such as the model system \"Arabidopsis thaliana\" and transgenic petunias.\n\nParamutation has also been documented in animals such as fruit flies, \"C. elegans\", and mice.\n\nThough the specific mechanisms by which paramutation acts vary from organism to organism, all well-documented cases point towards epigenetic modification and RNA-silencing as the underlying mechanism for paramutation.\n\nIn the case of the \"r1\" locus in maize, DNA methylation of a region of tandem repeats near the coding region of the gene is characteristic of the paramutagenic B’ allele, and when the paramutable B-I allele becomes paramutagenic, it too takes on the same DNA methylation pattern. In order for this methylation to be successfully transferred, a number of genes coding for RNA-dependent RNA polymerases and other components of RNA-silencing pathways are required, suggesting that paramutation is mediated via endogenous RNA-silencing pathways. The transcription of short interfering RNAs from the tandem repeat regions corroborates this. In animal systems such as \"Drosophila\", piRNAs have also been implicated in mediating paramutation. In addition to the characteristic DNA methylation state changes, changes in histone modification patterns in the methylated DNA regions, and/or the requirement of histone modifying proteins to mediate paramutation have also been noted in multiple systems. It has been suggested that these histone modifications play a role in maintaining the paramutated state. The previously mentioned tandem repeat region in the \"r1\" locus is also typical of other loci showing paramutation or paramutation-like phenomena.\n\nHowever, it has been noted that it is not possible to explain all occurrences and features of paramutation with what is known about RNAi-mediated transcriptional silencing, suggesting that other pathways and/or mechanisms are also at play.\n\nIt has been speculated that in any particular population, relatively few genes would show observable paramutation since the high penetrance of paramutagenic alleles (like B’ at the \"r1\" locus in maize) would drive either the paramutagenic or paramutable allele to fixation. Paramutation at other loci with paramutagenic alleles with lower penetrance may persist, however, which may need to be taken into account by plant breeders.\n\nSince there are examples of paramutation, or paramutation-like phenomena, in animals such as fruit flies and mice, it has been suggested that paramutation may explain the occurrence of some human diseases that exhibit non-Mendelian inheritance patterns.\n", "id": "2773777", "title": "Paramutation"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2898389", "text": "Minichromosome\n\nA minichromosome is a small chromatin-like structure consisting of centromeres, telomeres and replication origins and little additional genetic material. They replicate autonomously in the cell during cellular division. The origin of minichromosomes is the result of natural processes (chromosomal aberrations) or genetic engineering.\n\nMinichromosomes can be either linear or circular pieces of DNA. By minimizing the amount of unnecessary genetic information on the chromosome and including the basic components necessary for replication (centromere, telomeres, replication sequence), scientists aim to construct a chromosomal platform which can be utilized to insert/present new genes into a host organism's cell.\n\nProducing minichromosomes involves two primary methods, the \"de novo\" (bottom-up) and the top-down approach.\n\nThe minimum constituent parts of a chromosome (centromere, telomere and DNA replication sequences) are assembled \nThis is done by using molecular cloning techniques to construct the desired chromosomal contents \"in vitro\". Next, the desired contents of the minichromosome must be transformed into a host which is capable of assembling the components (typically yeast or mammalian cells) into a functional chromosome. This approach has been attempted for the introduction of minichromosomes into maize for the possibility of genetic engineering, but the success was limited and questionable. In general, the \"de novo\" approach is more difficult than a top down method due to species incompatibility issues and the heterochromatic nature of centromeric regions.\n\nThis method utilizes the mechanism of telomere-mediated chromosomal truncation (TMCT). This process is the generation of truncation by selective transformation of telomeric sequences into a host genome. This insertion causes the generation of more telomeric sequences and eventual truncation. The newly synthesized truncated chromosome can then be altered through the insertion of new genes for desired traits. The top-down approach is generally considered as the more plausible means of generating extra-numary chromosomes for the use of genetic engineering of plants. In particular it is useful because their stability during cell division has been demonstrated. The limitation of this approach is that it is labor-intensive.\n\nUnlike traditional methods of genetic engineering, minichromosomes can be used to transfer and express multiple sets of genes onto one engineered chromosome package, Traditional methods which involve the insertion of novel genes into existing sequences may result in the disruption of endogenous genes and thus negatively affect the host cell. Additionally, with traditional gene insertion methods, scientists have had less ability to control where the newly inserted genes are located on the host cell chromosomes which makes it difficult to predict inheritance of multiple genes from generation to generation. Minichromosome technology allows for the stacking of genes side-by-side on the same chromosome thus reducing likelihood of segregation of novel traits.\n\nIn 2006, scientists demonstrated the successful use of telomere truncation in maize plants to produce minichromosomes that could be utilized as a platform for inserting genes into the plant genome. In plants, the telomere sequence is conserved which implies this strategy can be utilized to successfully construction additional minichromosomes in other plant species.\n\nIn 2007, scientists reported success in assembling minichromosomes in vitro using the \"de novo\" method.\n\nThe use of minichromosomes as a means for generating more desirable crop traits is actively being explored. Major advantages include the ability to introduce genetic information which is highly compatible with the host genome. This eliminates the risk of disrupting various important processes such as cell division and gene expression. With continued development, the future for use of minichromosomes may make a huge impact on the productivity of major crops.\n\nMinichromosomes have been reported in yeast and animal cells. These minichromosomes were constructed using the De novo approach.\n\n", "id": "2898389", "title": "Minichromosome"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3167624", "text": "Point accepted mutation\n\nA point accepted mutation — also known as a PAM — is the replacement of a single amino acid in the primary structure of a protein with another single amino acid, which is accepted by the processes of natural selection. This definition does not include all point mutations in the DNA of an organism. In particular, silent mutations are not point accepted mutations, nor are mutations which are lethal or which are rejected by natural selection in other ways.\n\nA PAM matrix is a matrix where each column and row represents one of the twenty standard amino acids. In bioinformatics, PAM matrices are regularly used as substitution matrices to score sequence alignments for proteins. Each entry in a PAM matrix indicates the likelihood of the amino acid of that row being replaced with the amino acid of that column through a series of one or more point accepted mutations during a specified evolutionary interval, rather than these two amino acids being aligned due to chance. Different PAM matrices correspond to different lengths of time in the evolution of the protein sequence.\n\nThe genetic instructions of every replicating cell in a living organism are contained within its DNA. Throughout the cell's lifetime, this information is transcribed and replicated by cellular mechanisms to produce proteins or to provide instructions for daughter cells during cell division, and the possibility exists that the DNA may be altered during these processes. This is known as a mutation. At the molecular level, there are regulatory systems that correct most — but not all — of these changes to the DNA before it is replicated.\n\nOne of the possible mutations that occurs is the replacement of a single nucleotide, known as a point mutation. If a point mutation occurs within an expressed region of a gene, an exon, then this will change the codon specifying a particular amino acid in the protein produced by that gene. Despite the redundancy in the genetic code, there is a possibility that this mutation will then change the amino acid that is produced during translation, and as a consequence the structure of the protein will be changed.\n\nThe functionality of a protein is highly dependent on its structure. Changing a single amino acid in a protein may reduce its ability to carry out this function, or the mutation may even change the function that the protein carries out. Changes like these may severely impact a crucial function in a cell, potentially causing the cell — and in extreme cases, the organism — to die. Conversely, the change may allow the cell to continue functioning albeit differently, and the mutation can be passed on to the organism's offspring. If this change does not result in any significant physical disadvantage to the offspring, the possibility exists that this mutation will persist within the population. The possibility also exists that the change in function becomes advantageous. In either case, while being subjected to the processes of natural selection, the point mutation has been accepted into the genetic pool.\n\nThe 20 amino acids translated by the genetic code vary greatly by the physical and chemical properties of their side chains. However, these amino acids can be categorised into groups with similar physicochemical properties. Substituting an amino acid with another from the same category is more likely to have a smaller impact on the structure and function of a protein than replacement with an amino acid from a different category. Consequently, acceptance of point mutations depends heavily on the amino acid being replaced in the mutation, and the replacement amino acid. The PAM matrices are a mathematical tool that account for these varying rates of acceptance when evaluating the similarity of proteins during alignment.\n\nThe term \"accepted point mutation\" was initially used to describe the mutation phenomenon. However, the acronym PAM was preferred over APM due to readability, and so the term \"point accepted mutation\" is used more regularly. Because the value formula_1 in the PAM matrix represents the number of mutations per 100 amino acids, which can be likened to a percentage of mutations, the term \"percentage accepted mutation\" is sometimes used.\n\nIt is important to distinguish between point accepted mutations (PAMs), point accepted mutation matrices (PAM matrices) and the PAM matrix. The term 'point accepted mutation' refers to the mutation event itself. However, 'PAM matrix' refers to one of a family of matrices which contain scores representing the likelihood of two amino acids being aligned due to a series of mutation events, rather than due to random chance. The 'PAM matrix' is the PAM matrix corresponding to a time frame long enough for formula_1 mutation events to occur per 100 amino acids.\n\nPAM matrices were introduced by Margaret Dayhoff in 1978. The calculation of these matrices were based on 1572 observed mutations in the phylogenetic trees of 71 families of closely related proteins. The proteins to be studied were selected on the basis of having high similarity with their predecessors. The protein alignments included were required to display at least 85% identity. As a result, it is reasonable to assume that any aligned mismatches were the result of a single mutation event, rather than several at the same location.\n\nEach PAM matrix has twenty rows and twenty columns — one representing each of the twenty amino acids translated by the genetic code. The value in each cell of a PAM matrix is related to the probability of a row amino acid before the mutation being aligned with a column amino acid afterwards. From this definition, PAM matrices are an example of a substitution matrix.\n\nFor each branch in the phylogenetic trees of the protein families, the number of mismatches that were observed were recorded and a record kept of the two amino acids involved. These counts were used as entries below the main diagonal of the matrix formula_3. Since the vast majority of protein samples come from organisms that are alive today (extant species), the 'direction' of a mutation cannot be determined. That is, the amino acid present before the mutation cannot be distinguished from the amino acid that replaced it after the mutation. Because of this, the matrix formula_3 is assumed to be symmetric, and the entries of formula_3 above the main diagonal are computed on this basis. The entries along the diagonal of formula_3 do not correspond to mutations and can be left unfilled.\n\nIn addition to these counts, data on the mutability and the frequency of the amino acids was obtained. The mutability of an amino acid is the ratio of the number of mutations it is involved in and the number of times it occurs in an alignment. Mutability measures how likely an amino acid is to mutate acceptably. Asparagine, an amino acid with a small polar side chain, was found to be the most mutable of the amino acids. Cysteine and tryptophan were found to be the least mutable amino acids. The side chains for cysteine and tryptophan have less common structures: cysteine's side chain contains sulfur which participates in disulfide bonds with other cysteine molecules, and tryptophan's side chain is large and aromatic. Since there are several small polar amino acids, these extremes suggest that amino acids are more likely to acceptably mutate if their physical and chemical properties are more common among alternative amino acids.\n\nFor the formula_7th amino acid, the values formula_8 and formula_9 are its mutability and frequency. The frequencies of the amino acids are normalised so that they sum to 1. If total number of occurrences of the formula_7th amino acid is formula_11, and formula_12 is the total number of all amino acids, then\n\nBased on the definition of mutability as the ratio of mutations to occurrences of an amino acid\n\nor \n\nThe mutation matrix formula_16 is constructed so that the entry formula_17 represents the probability of the formula_7th amino acid mutating into the formula_19th amino acid. The non-diagonal entries are computed by the equation\n\nwhere formula_21 is a constant of proportionality. However, this equation does not compute the diagonal entries. Each column in the matrix formula_16 lists each of the twenty possible outcomes for an amino acid — it can mutate into one of the 19 other amino acids, or remain unchanged. Since the non-diagonal entries listing the probabilities of each of the 19 mutations are known, and the sum of the probabilities of these twenty outcomes must be 1, this last probability can be calculated by\n\nwhich simplifies to\n\nA result of particular significance is that for the non-diagonal entries\n\nWhich means that for all entries in the mutation matrix\n\nThe probabilities contained in formula_16 vary as some unknown function of the amount of time that a protein sequence is allowed to mutate for. Instead of attempting to determine this relationship, the values of formula_16 are calculated for a short time frame, and the matrices for longer periods of time are calculated by assuming mutations follow a Markov chain model. The base unit of time for the PAM matrices is the time required for 1 mutation to occur per 100 amino acids, sometimes called 'a PAM unit' or 'a PAM' of time. This is precisely the duration of mutation assumed by the PAM matrix.\n\nThe constant formula_21 is used to control the proportion of amino acids that are unchanged. By using only alignments of proteins that had at least 85% similarity, it could be reasonably assumed that the mutations observed were direct, without any intermediate states. This means that scaling down these counts by a common factor would provide an accurate estimate of the mutation counts had the similarity been closer to 100%. It also means that the number of mutations per 100 amino acids, the formula_1 in PAM is equal to the number of mutated amino acids per 100 amino acids.\n\nTo find the mutation matrix for the PAM matrix, the requirement that 99% of the amino acids in a sequence are conserved is imposed. The quantity formula_31 is equal to the number of conserved amino acid formula_7 units, and so the total number of conserved amino acids is\n\nThe value of formula_21 needed to be pick to produce 99% identity after mutation is then given by the equation\n\nThis formula_21 value can then be used in the mutation matrix for the PAM matrix.\n\nThe Markov chain model of protein mutation relates the mutation matrix for PAM, formula_37, to the mutation matrix for the PAM matrix, formula_38 by the simple relationship\n\nThe PAM matrix is constructed from the ratio of the probability of point accepted mutations replacing the formula_7th amino acid with the formula_19th amino acid, to the probability of these amino acids being aligned by chance.\nThe entries of the PAM matrix are given by the equation\n\nNote that in Gusfield's book, the entries formula_17 and formula_44 are related to the probability of the formula_19th amino acid mutating into the formula_7th amino acid. This is the origin of the different equation for the entries of the PAM matrices.\n\nWhen using the PAM matrix to score an alignment of two proteins, the following assumption is made:\nWhen the alignment of the formula_19th and formula_7th amino acids is considered, the score indicates the relative likelihoods of the alignment due to the proteins being related or due to random chance.\n\nWhile the mutation probability matrix formula_16 is not symmetric, each of the PAM matrices are. This somewhat surprising property is a result of the relationship that was noted for the mutation probability matrix:\n\nIn fact, this relationship holds for all positive integer powers of the matrix formula_16:\n\nAs a result, the entries of the PAM matrix are symmetric, since\n\nThe value formula_1 represents the number of mutations that occur per 100 amino acids, however this value is rarely accessible and often estimated. However, when comparing two proteins it is easy to calculate formula_67 instead, which is the number of mutated amino acids per 100 amino acids. Despite the random nature of mutation, these values can be approximately related by\n\nThe validity of these estimates can be verified by counting the number of amino acids that remain unchanged under the action of the matrix formula_16. The total number of unchanged amino acids for the time interval of the PAM matrix is\n\nand so the proportion of unchanged amino acids is\n\nA PAM250 is a commonly used scoring matrix for sequence comparison. Only the lower half of the matrix needs to be computed, since by their construction, PAM matrices are required to be symmetric. Each of the 20 amino acid are shown down the top and side of the matrix, with 3 additional ambiguous amino acids. The amino acids are most commonly shown listed alphabetically, or listed in groups. These groups are the characteristics shared among the amino acids.\n\nThe molecular clock hypothesis predicts that the rate of amino acid substitution in a particular protein will be approximately constant over time, though this rate may vary between protein families. This suggests that the number of mutations per amino acid in a protein increases approximately linearly with time.\n\nDetermining the time at which two proteins diverged is an important task in phylogenetics. Fossil records are often used to establish the position of events on the timeline of the Earth's evolutionary history, but the application of this source is limited. However, if the rate at which the molecular clock of protein family ticks — that is, the rate at which the number of mutations per amino acid increases — is known, then knowing this number of mutations would allow the date of divergence to be found.\n\nSuppose the date of divergence for two related proteins, taken from organisms living today, is sought. The two proteins have both been accumulating accepted mutations since the date of divergence, and so the total number of mutations per amino acid separating them is approximately twice that which separates them from their common ancestor. If a range of PAM matrices are used to align two proteins that are known to be related, then the value of formula_1 in the PAM matrix which results in the best score is most likely to correspond to the mutations per amino acid separating the two proteins. Halving this value and dividing by the rate at which accepted mutations accumulate in the protein family provides an estimate of the time of divergence of these two proteins from their common ancestor. That is, the time of divergence in myr is\n\nWhere formula_74 is the number of mutations per amino acid, and formula_75 is the rate of accepted mutation accumulation in mutations per amino acid site per million years.\n\nPAM matrices are also used as a scoring matrix when comparing DNA sequences or protein sequences to judge the quality of the alignment. This form of scoring system is utilized by a wide range of alignment software including BLAST.\n\nIn addition to PAM matrices, another more recently developed scoring matrix can be used. This is known as a BLOSUM. The two result in the same scoring outcome, but use differing methodologies. BLOSUM directly look at mutations in motifs of related sequences while PAM's extrapolate evolutionary information based on closely related sequences.\n\nSince both PAM and BLOSUM are different methods for showing the same scoring information, the two can be compared but due to the very different method of obtaining this score, a PAM100 does not equal a BLOSUM100.\n\n", "id": "3167624", "title": "Point accepted mutation"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3492581", "text": "Transmission disequilibrium test\n\nThe transmission disequilibrium test (TDT) was proposed by Spielman, McGinnis and Ewens (1993) as a family-based association test for the presence of genetic linkage between a genetic marker and a trait. It is an application of McNemar's test.\n\nA specificity of the TDT is that it will detect genetic linkage only in the presence of genetic association.\nWhile genetic association can be caused by population structure, genetic linkage will not be affected, which makes the TDT robust to the presence of population structure.\n\nWe first describe the TDT in the case where families consist of trios (two parents and one affected child). Our description follows the notations used in Spielman, McGinnis & Ewens (1993).\n\nThe TDT measures the over-transmission of an allele from heterozygous parents to affected offsprings.\nThe \"n\" affected offsprings have 2\"n\" parents. These can be represented by the transmitted and the non-transmitted alleles formula_1 and formula_2 at some genetic locus. Summarizing the data in a 2 by 2 table gives:\nThe derivation of the TDT shows that one should only use the heterozygous parents (total number \"b\"+\"c\").\nThe TDT tests whether the proportions \"b\"/(\"b\"+\"c\") and \"c\"/(\"b\"+\"c\") are compatible with probabilities (0.5, 0.5).\nThis hypothesis can be tested using a binomial (asymptotically chi-square) test with one degree of freedom:\n\nformula_3\n\nA derivation of the test consists of using a population genetics model to obtain the expected proportions for the quantities formula_4 and formula_5 in the table above. In particular, one can show that under nearly all disease models the expected proportion of formula_6 and formula_7 are identical. This result motivates the use of a binomial (asymptotically formula_8) test to test whether these proportions are equal.\n\nOn the other hand, one can also show that under such models the proportions formula_4 and formula_5 are not equal to the product of the marginals probabilities formula_11, formula_12 and formula_13, formula_14. A rewording of this statement would be that the type of the transmitted allele is not, in general, independent of the type of the non-transmitted allele. A consequence is that a formula_8 test for homogeneity/independence does not test the appropriate hypothesis, and thus, only heterozygous parents are included.\n\nThe TDT can be readily extended beyond the case of trios. We keep following the notations of Spielman, McGinnis & Ewens (1993). Let us consider a total of formula_16 heterozygous parents. We use the fact that the transmission to different children are independent. The information can be then summarized in three categories:\n\nformula_17 = number of parents who transmit formula_1 to both children.<br>\nformula_19 = number of parents who transmit formula_1 to one child and formula_2 to another. <br>\nformula_22 = number of parents who transmit formula_2 to both children.\n\nUsing the notations of the previous paragraph we have:\n\nleading to the chi-squared test statistic:\n\nThe comparison with the more traditional (at least at the time when the TDT was proposed) linkage test proposed by Blackwelder and Elston 1985 is informative.\nThe Blackwelder and Elston approach uses the total number of haplotypes identical by descent (mean haplotype sharing). This measure ignores the allelic state of a marker and simply compares the number of times a parent transmits the same allele to both affected children with the number of times a different allele is transmitted.\nThe test statistic is:\n\nUnder the null hypothesis of no linkage the expected proportions of (\"i\", \"h\" − \"i\" − \"j\", \"j\") are (0.25, 0.5, 0.25). One can derive a simple chi-square statistic with 2 degrees of freedom:\n\nIt clearly appears that the total statistic (with two degree of freedom) is the sum of two independent components: one is the traditional linkage measure and the other is the TDT statistic.\n\nMore recently, Wittkowski KM, Liu X. (2002/2004) proposed a modification to the TDT that can be more powerful under some alternatives, although the asymptotic properties under the null hypothesis are equivalent.\n\nThe motivating idea for this modification is the fact that, while the transmissions of both allele from parents to a child are independent, the effects of other filial genetic or environmental covariates on penetrance are the same for both alleles transmitted to the same child. This situation can be important if, for example, the genetic marker is linked to a disease locus with a strong selection against heterozygous individuals. This observation suggests to shift the statistical model from a set of independent transmissions to a set of independent children (see Sasieni (1997) for the corresponding problem in case-control association tests). While this observation does not affect the distribution under the null hypothesis of no linkage, it allows, for some disease models, to design a more powerful test.\n\nIn this modified TDT test the children are stratified by parental type and the modified test statistic becomes:\n\nwhere formula_30 is the number of PQ children from parents with the PQ and QQ types.\n\nBeagle\n\n", "id": "3492581", "title": "Transmission disequilibrium test"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2268029", "text": "Phenocopy\n\nA phenocopy is a variation in phenotype (generally referring to a single trait) which is caused by environmental conditions (often, but not necessarily, during the organism's development), such that the organism's phenotype matches a phenotype which is determined by genetic factors. It is not a type of mutation, as it is non-hereditary.\n\nThe term was coined by Richard Goldschmidt in 1935. He used it to refer to forms, produced by some experimental procedure, whose appearance duplicates or copies the phenotype of some mutant or combination of mutants.\n\nThe \"Vanessa\" genus of butterflies can change phenotype based on the local temperature. If introduced to Lapland they mimic butterflies localised to this area; and if localised to Syria they mimic butterflies of this area.\n\nThe larvae of \"Drosophila melanogaster\" have been found to be particularly vulnerable to environmental factors which produce phenocopies of known mutations; these factors include temperature, shock, radiation, and various chemical compounds. In fruit fly, \"Drosophila melanogaster\", the normal body colour is brownish gray with black margins. A hereditary mutant for this was discovered by T.H. Morgan in 1910 where the body colour is yellow. This was a genotypic character which was constant in both the flies in all environments. However, in 1939, Rapport discovered that if larva of normal flies were fed with silver salts, they develop into yellow bodied flies irrespective of their genotype. The yellow bodied flies which are genetically brown is a variant of the original yellow bodied fly.\n\nPhenocopy can also be observed in Himalayan rabbits. When raised in moderate temperatures, Himalayan rabbits are white in colour with black tail, nose, and ears, making them phenotypically distinguishable from genetically black rabbits. However, when raised in cold temperatures, Himalayan rabbits show black colouration of their coats, resembling the genetically black rabbits. Hence this Himalayan rabbit is a phenocopy of the genetically black rabbit.\n\nReversible and/or cosmetic modifications such as the use of hair bleach are not considered to be phenocopy, as they are not inherent traits.\n\n", "id": "2268029", "title": "Phenocopy"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2763223", "text": "Polynucleotide\n\nA polynucleotide molecule is a biopolymer composed of 13 or more nucleotide monomers covalently bonded in a chain. DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) and RNA (ribonucleic acid) are examples of polynucleotides with distinct biological function. The prefix \"poly\" comes from the ancient Greek πολυς (polys, \"many\"). DNA consists of two chains of polynucleotides, with each chain in the form of a helical spiral.\n\nAlthough DNA and RNA do not generally occur in the same polynucleotide, the four species of nucleotides may occur in any order in the chain. The sequence of DNA or RNA species for a given polynucleotide is the main factor determining its function in a living organism or a scientific experiment.\n\nPolynucleotides occur naturally in all living organisms. The genome of an organism consists of complementary pairs of enormously long polynucleotides wound around each other in the form of a double helix. Polynucleotides have a variety of other roles in organisms.\n\nPolynucleotides are used in biochemical experiments such as polymerase chain reaction (PCR) or DNA sequencing. Polynucleotides are made artificially from oligonucleotides, smaller nucleotide chains with generally fewer than 30 subunits. A polymerase enzyme is used to extend the chain by adding nucleotides according to a pattern specified by the scientist.\n", "id": "2763223", "title": "Polynucleotide"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3611981", "text": "Genetic hitchhiking\n\nGenetic hitchhiking, also called genetic draft or the hitchhiking effect, is when an allele changes frequency not because it itself is under natural selection, but because it is near another gene that is undergoing a selective sweep and that is on the same DNA chain. When one gene goes through a selective sweep, any other nearby polymorphisms that are in linkage disequilibrium will tend to change their allele frequencies too. Selective sweeps happen when newly appeared (and hence still rare) mutations are advantageous and increase in frequency. Neutral or even slightly deleterious alleles that happen to be close by on the chromosome 'hitchhike' along with the sweep. In contrast, effects on a neutral locus due to linkage disequilibrium with newly appeared deleterious mutations are called background selection. Both genetic hitchhiking and background selection are stochastic (random) evolutionary forces, like genetic drift.\n\nAlthough the term \"hitchhiking\" was coined in 1974 by Maynard Smith and John Haigh, the phenomenon it refers to remained little studied until the work of John H. Gillespie in 2000.\n\nHitchhiking occurs when a neutral polymorphism is in linkage disequilibrium with a second locus that is undergoing a selective sweep. The neutral allele that is linked to the adaptation will increase in frequency, in some cases until it becomes fixed in the population. The other neutral allele, which is linked to the non-advantageous version, will decrease in frequency, in some cases until extinction. Overall, hitchhiking reduces the amount of genetic variation.\n\nDeleterious \"passenger\" mutations can also hitchhike, not just neutral mutations.\n\nRecombination can interrupt the process of genetic hitchhiking, ending it before the hitchhiking neutral or deleterious allele becomes fixed or goes extinct. The closer a hitchhiking polymorphism is to the gene under selection, the less opportunity there is for recombination to occur. This leads to a reduction in genetic variation near a selective sweep that is greater closer to the selected site. This pattern is useful for using population data to detect selective sweeps, and hence to detect which genes have been under very recent selection.\n\nBoth genetic drift and genetic draft are random evolutionary processes, i.e. they act stochastically and in a way that is not correlated with selection at the gene in question. Drift is the change in the frequency of an allele in a population due to random sampling in each generation. Draft is the change in the frequency of an allele due to the randomness of what other non-neutral alleles it happens to be found in association with.\n\nAssuming genetic drift is the only evolutionary force acting on an allele, after one generation in many replicated idealised populations each of size N, each starting with allele frequencies of p and q, the newly added variance in allele frequency across those populations (i.e. the degree of randomness of the outcome) is formula_1. This equation shows that the effect of genetic drift is heavily dependent on population size, defined as the actual number of individuals in an idealised population. Genetic draft results in similar behavior to the equation above, but with an effective population size that may have no relationship to the actual number of individuals in the population. Instead, the effective population size may depend on factors such as the recombination rate and the frequency and strength of beneficial mutations. The increase in variance between replicate populations due to drift is independent, whereas with draft it is autocorrelated, i.e. if an allele frequency goes up because of genetic drift, that contains no information about the next generation, whereas if it goes up because of genetic draft, it is more likely to go up than down in the next generation. Genetic draft generates a different allele frequency spectrum to genetic drift.\n\nThe Y chromosome does not undergo recombination, making it particularly prone to the fixation of deleterious mutations via hitchhiking. This has been proposed as an explanation as to why there are so few functional genes on the Y chromosome.\n\nWhen a population is expanding geographically, genetic hitchhiking can be intensified at the invasive species front, where adaptive alleles get a double advantage: they are adaptive, and they also arrive first in new territories. This phenomenon is known as gene surfing.\n\nHitchhiking is necessary for the evolution of higher mutation rates to be favored by natural selection on evolvability. A hypothetical mutator M increases the general mutation rate in the area around it. Due to the increased mutation rate, the nearby A allele may be mutated into a new, advantageous allele, A*\n\n--M------A-- -> --M------A*--\n\nThe individual in which this chromosome lies will now have a selective advantage over other individuals of this species, so the allele A* will spread through the population by the normal processes of natural selection. M, due to its proximity to A*, will be dragged through into the general population. This process only works when M is very close to the allele it has mutated. A greater distance would increase the chance of recombination separating M from A*, leaving M alone with any deleterious mutations it may have caused. For this reason, evolution of mutators is generally expected to happen largely in asexual species where recombination cannot disrupt linkage disequilibrium.\n\nThe neutral theory of molecular evolution assumes that most new mutations are either deleterious (and quickly purged by selection) or else neutral, with very few being adaptive. It also assumes that the behavior of neutral allele frequencies can be described by the mathematics of genetic drift. Genetic hitchhiking has therefore been viewed as a major challenge to neutral theory, and an explanation for why genome-wide versions of the McDonald-Kreitman test appear to indicate a high proportion of mutations becoming fixed for reasons connected to selection.\n", "id": "3611981", "title": "Genetic hitchhiking"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3692001", "text": "Insertion sequence\n\nAn insertion sequence (also known as an IS, an insertion sequence element, or an IS element) is a short DNA sequence that acts as a simple transposable element. Insertion sequences have two major characteristics: they are small relative to other transposable elements (generally around 700 to 2500 bp in length) and only code for proteins implicated in the transposition activity (they are thus different from other transposons, which also carry accessory genes such as antibiotic resistance genes). These proteins are usually the transposase which catalyses the enzymatic reaction allowing the IS to move, and also one regulatory protein which either stimulates or inhibits the transposition activity. The coding region in an insertion sequence is usually flanked by inverted repeats. For example, the well-known IS\"911\" (1250 bp) is flanked by two 36bp inverted repeat extremities and the coding region has two genes partially overlapping \"orfA\" and \"orfAB\", coding the transposase (OrfAB) and a regulatory protein (OrfA). A particular insertion sequence may be named according to the form IS\"n\", where \"n\" is a number (e.g. IS\"1\", IS\"2\", IS\"3\", IS\"10\", IS\"50\", IS\"911\", IS\"26\" etc.); this is not the only naming scheme used, however. Although insertion sequences are usually discussed in the context of prokaryotic genomes, certain eukaryotic DNA sequences belonging to the family of Tc1/\"mariner\" transposable elements may be considered to be, insertion sequences.\nIn addition to occurring autonomously, insertion sequences may also occur as parts of composite transposons; in a composite transposon, two insertion sequences flank one or more accessory genes, such as an antibiotic resistance gene (e.g. Tn10, Tn\"5\"). Nevertheless, there exist another sort of transposons, called unit transposons, that do not carry insertion sequences at their extremities (e.g. Tn\"7\").\n\nA complex transposon does not rely on flanking insertion sequences for resolvase. The resolvase is part of the tns genome and cuts at flanking inverted repeats.\n\n\n\n", "id": "3692001", "title": "Insertion sequence"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3485068", "text": "Phylogenomics\n\nPhylogenomics is the intersection of the fields of evolution and genomics. The term has been used in multiple ways to refer to analysis that involves genome data and evolutionary reconstructions. It is a group of techniques within the larger fields of phylogenetics and genomics. Phylogenomics draws information by comparing entire genomes, or at least large portions of genomes. Phylogenetics compares and analyzes the sequences of single genes, or a small number of genes, as well as many other types of data. Four major areas fall under phylogenomics:\n\nWhen Jonathan Eisen originally coined \"phylogenomics\", it applied to prediction of gene function. Before the use of phylogenomic techniques, predicting gene function was done primarily by comparing the gene sequence with the sequences of genes with known functions. When several genes with similar sequences but differing functions are involved, this method alone is ineffective in determining function. A specific example is presented in the paper \"Gastronomic Delights: A movable feast\". Gene predictions based on sequence similarity alone had been used to predict that \"Helicobacter pylori\" can repair mismatched DNA. This prediction was based on the fact that this organism has a gene for which the sequence is highly similar to genes from other species in the \"MutS\" gene family which included many known to be involved in mismatch repair. However, Eisen noted that \"H. pylori\" lacks other genes thought to be essential for this function (specifically, members of the MutL family). Eisen suggested a solution to this apparent discrepancy – phylogenetic trees of genes in the MutS family revealed that the gene found in \"H. pylori\" was not in the same subfamily as those known to be involved in mismatch repair. Furthermore, he suggested that this \"phylogenomic\" approach could be used as a general method for prediction functions of genes. This approach was formally described in 1998. For reviews of this aspect of phylogenomics see Brown D, Sjölander K. Functional classification using phylogenomic inference.\n\nTraditional phylogenetic techniques have difficulty establishing differences between genes that are similar because of lateral gene transfer and those that are similar because the organisms shared an ancestor. By comparing large numbers of genes or entire genomes among many species, it is possible to identify transferred genes, since these sequences behave differently from what is expected given the taxonomy of the organism. Using these methods, researchers were able to identify over 2,000 metabolic enzymes obtained by various eukaryotic parasites from lateral gene transfer.\n\nThe comparison of complete gene sets for a group of organisms allows the identification of events in gene evolution such as gene duplication or gene deletion. Often, such events are evolutionarily relevant. For example, multiple duplications of genes encoding degradative enzymes of certain families is a common adaptation in microbes to new nutrient sources. On the contrary, loss of genes is important in reductive evolution, such as in intracellular parasites or symbionts. Whole genome duplication events, which potentially duplicate all the genes in a genome at once, are drastic evolutionary events with great relevance in the evolution of many clades, and whose signal can be traced with phylogenomic methods.\n\nTraditional single-gene studies are effective in establishing phylogenetic trees among closely related organisms, but have drawbacks when comparing more distantly related organisms or microorganisms. This is because of lateral gene transfer, convergence, and varying rates of evolution for different genes. By using entire genomes in these comparisons, the anomalies created from these factors are overwhelmed by the pattern of evolution indicated by the majority of the data. Through phylogenomics, it has been discovered that most of the photosynthetic eukaryotes are linked and possibly share a single ancestor. Researchers compared 135 genes from 65 different species of photosynthetic organisms. These included plants, alveolates, rhizarians, haptophytes and cryptomonads. This has been referred to as the Plants+HC+SAR megagroup. Using this method, it is theoretically possible to create fully resolved phylogenetic trees, and timing constraints can be recovered more accurately. However, in practice this is not always the case. Due to insufficient data, multiple trees can sometimes be supported by the same data when analyzed using different methods.\n\n\n", "id": "3485068", "title": "Phylogenomics"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2599754", "text": "Minnesota Twin Family Study\n\nThe Minnesota Twin Family Study (or MTFS) is a longitudinal study of twins conducted by researchers at the University of Minnesota. It seeks to identify the genetic and environmental influences on the development of psychological traits.\n\nPrincipal investigators are David T. Lykken, Matt McGue, William Iacono, and Kevin Haroian. It involves several independent but related projects:\n\n\nThe Minnesota Twin Registry was established in 1983. Its original goal was to establish a registry of all twins born in Minnesota from 1936 to 1955 to be used for psychological research. Recently, it has added twins born between 1961 and 1964. It primarily conducts personality and interests tests with its 8,000+ twin pairs and family members via mail. From this project, it was able to confirm that twins and their families are representative of the population and that a poll of their opinions would be more accurate than polls in the newspaper.\n\nMTFS was established in June 1989 using same-gendered twin pairs age 11 or 17. All twins born in MN at that time were invited to participate using birth registry data. 500 additional 11-year-old twin-pairs were added in 2000. Twin studies are valuable to researchers because identical twins share 100% of their genes and fraternal twins share, on average, 50% of their genes. Both identical and fraternal twins share certain aspects of their environment (e.g. religious practices in the home). This allows researchers to estimate the heritability of certain traits. Participants are asked about academic ability, personality, and interests; family and social relationships; mental and physical health; physiological measurements. Of interest to researchers are prevalence of psychopathology, substance abuse, divorce, leadership, and other traits and behaviors related to mental and physical health, relationships, and religiosity.\n\nIn 1979, Thomas J. Bouchard began to study twins who were separated at birth and reared in different families. He found that an identical twin reared away from his or her co-twin seems to have about an equal chance of being similar to the co-twin in terms of personality, interests, and attitudes as one who has been reared with his or her co-twin. This leads to the conclusion that the similarities between twins are due to genes, not environment, since the differences between twins reared apart must be due totally to the environment. Psychologist now refer to studies such as this as an Adoption Strategy.\n\n\n", "id": "2599754", "title": "Minnesota Twin Family Study"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2142005", "text": "Position effect\n\nPosition effect is the effect on the expression of a gene when its location in a chromosome is changed, often by translocation. This has been well described in \"Drosophila\" with respect to eye color and is known as position effect variegation (PEV).\n\nThe phenotype is well characterised by unstable expression of a gene that results in the red eye coloration. In the mutant flies the eyes typically have a mottled appearance of white and red sectors. These phenotypes are often due to a chromosomal translocation such that the color gene is now close to a region of heterochromatin. The heterochromatin can spread stochastically and switch off the color gene resulting in the white eye sectors.\n\n\"Position effect\" is also used to describe the variation of expression exhibited by identical transgenes that insert into different regions of a genome. In this case the difference in expression is often due to enhancers that regulate neighboring genes. These local enhancers can also affect the expression pattern of the transgene. Since each transgenic organism has the transgene in a different location each transgenic organism has the potential for a unique expression pattern.\n", "id": "2142005", "title": "Position effect"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4103495", "text": "Nuclear gene\n\nA nuclear gene is a gene located in the cell nucleus of a eukaryote. The term is used to distinguish nuclear genes from the genes in the mitochondrion, and in case of plants, also the chloroplast, which host their own genetic system and can produce proteins from scratch. The term \"gene\" most often refers to nuclear genes.\n\nThe distinct genomes of eukaryotes are thought to have arisen through symbiotic relationships. The mitochondrion represents a eubacterium that integrated into its archaeal host cell's physiology to such an extent that it became an integral cell component, or organelle. The process repeated in plants, with a cyanobacterial symbiont in a eukaryote host becoming the chloroplast. The nuclear genes represent the genome of the original host cell, while both of these organelles still retain a small genome, although many of the genes of the organelles have moved to the nucleus during the course of evolution. \n\nThe majority of the proteins of a cell are the product of messenger RNA transcribed from nuclear genes, including most of the proteins of the organelles, which are produced in the cytoplasm like all nuclear gene products and then transported to the organelle. In addition, there are nuclear genes that encode non-translated regulatory RNAs. Mutations can occur when translating the messenger RNA into amino acid. The gene’s frame is read three bases at a time called codon, there is only one starting codon and three stopping codons, they are key codons for the determining of the reading frame of the genetic information. Each codon corresponds to an amino acid used in the synthesis of proteins. The mutation occurs when there is a deletion or insertion of base into the reading frame of the gene. Mutation can result in different amino acid which codes different protein. Genes in the nucleus are arranged in a linear fashion upon chromosomes, which serve as the scaffold for replication and the regulation of gene expression. As such, they are usually under strict copy-number control, and replicate a single time per cell cycle.\n", "id": "4103495", "title": "Nuclear gene"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4166856", "text": "Active chromatin sequence\n\nAn active chromatin sequence (ACS) is a region of DNA in a eukaryotic chromosome in which histone modifications such as acetylation lead to exposure of the DNA sequence thus allowing binding of transcription factors and transcription to take place. Active chromatin may also be called euchromatin. ACSs may occur in non-expressed gene regions which are assumed to be \"poised\" for transcription. The sequence once exposed often contains a promoter to began transcription. At this site acetylation or methylation can take place causing a conformational change to the chromatin. At the active chromatin sequence site deacetylation can caused the gene to be repressed if not being expressed.\n\nChromatin\n", "id": "4166856", "title": "Active chromatin sequence"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4413835", "text": "Dynamical genetics\n\nDynamical genetics concerns the study and the interpretation of those phenomena in which physiological enzymatic protein complexes alter the DNA, in a more or less sophisticated way.\n\nThe study of such mechanisms is important firstly since they promote useful functions, as for example the immune system recombination (on individual scale) and the crossing-over (on evolutionary scale); secondly since they may sometimes become harmful because of some malfunctioning, causing for example neurodegenerative disorders.\n\nTypical examples of dynamical genetics subjects are:\n", "id": "4413835", "title": "Dynamical genetics"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3865332", "text": "Genomic convergence\n\nGenomic convergence is a multifactor approach used in genetic research that combines different kinds of genetic data analysis to identify and prioritize susceptibility genes for a complex disease.\n\nIn January 2003, Michael Hauser along with fellow researchers at the Duke Center for Human Genetics (CHG) coined the term “genomic convergence” to describe their endeavor to identify genes affecting the expression of Parkinson disease (PD). Their work successfully combined serial analysis of gene expression (SAGE) with genetic linkage analysis. The authors explain, “While both linkage and expression analyses are powerful on their own, the number of possible genes they present as candidates for PD or any complex disorder remains extremely large”. The convergence of the two methods allowed researchers to decrease the number of possible PD genes to consider for further study. \n\nTheir success prompted further use of the genomic convergence method at the CHG, and in July 2003 Yi-Ju Li, \"et al.\" published a paper revealing that glutathione S-transferase omega-1 (GSTO1) modifies the age-at-onset (AAO) of Alzheimer disease (AD) and PD. \n\nIn May 2004, Dr. Margaret Pericak-Vance, currently the director of the John P. Hussman Institute for Human Genomics at the University of Miami Miller School of Medicine and then the director of the CHG, articulated the value of the genomic convergence method at a New York Academy of Sciences (NYAS) keynote address entitled \"Novel Methods in Genetic Exploration of Neurodegenerative Disease.\" She stated, \"No single method is going to get us where we need to be with these complex traits. It is going to take a combination of methods to dissect the underlying etiology of these disorders\".\n\nGenomic convergence has a countless number of creative applications that combine the strengths of different analyses and studies. Maher Noureddine et al., note in their 2005 paper, “One of the growing problems in the study of complex diseases is how to prioritize research and make sense of the immense amount of data now readily available at the click of a computer mouse...The best approach may be to take advantage of the strengths of both…SAGE …and microarrays”. \n\nThe results of combining methods of analysis have continued to be promising. Sofia Oliveira et al. (2005) combined gene expression, linkage data, and “iterative association mapping” to identify several genes associated with PD AAO. \n\nFuture studies will continue to apply genomic convergence to elucidate the etiology of complex diseases. Dr. Jeff Vance, Director of the Morris K. Udall PD Research Center of Excellence, notes, “Genomic convergence is really no different from mathematical convergence – the more angles from which you can come at a problem, the better chance you have of solving it”.\n", "id": "3865332", "title": "Genomic convergence"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4677237", "text": "Gene cassette\n\nA gene cassette is a type of mobile genetic element that contains a gene and a recombination site. Each cassette usually only contains a single gene and tend to be very small; on the order of 500–1000 base pairs. They may exist incorporated into an integron or freely as circular DNA. Gene cassettes can move around within an organism genome or be transferred to another organism in the environment via horizontal gene transfer. These cassettes often carry antibiotic resistance genes. An example would be the \"kanMX\" cassette which confers kanamycin (an antibiotic) resistance upon bacteria.\n\nIntegrons are genetic structures in bacteria which express and are capable of acquiring and exchanging gene cassettes. The integron consists of a promoter, an attachment site, and an integrase gene that encodes a site-specific recombinase There are three classes of integrons described. The mobile units that insert into integrons are gene cassettes. For cassettes that carry a single gene without a promoter, the entire series of cassettes is transcribed from an adjacent promoter within the integron. The gene cassettes are speculated to be inserted and excised via a circular intermediate. This would involve recombination between short sequences found at their termini and known as 59 base elements (59-be)—which may not be 59 bases long. The 59-be are a diverse family of sequences that function as recognition sites for the site-specific integrase (enzyme responsible for integrating the gene cassette into an integron) that occur downstream from the gene coding sequence.\n\nThe ability of genetic elements like gene cassettes to excise and insert into genomes results in highly similar gene regions appearing in distantly related organisms. The three classes of integrons are similar in structure and are identified by where the insertions occur and what systems they coincide with. Class 1 integrons are seen in a diverse group of bacterial genomes and likely are all descendant from one common ancestor. The prevalence of the integron has shaped bacterial evolution by allowing rapid transfer of genes that are novel to an organism, such as antibiotic resistance genes.\n\nIn genetic engineering, a gene cassette is a manipulable fragment of DNA carrying, and capable of expressing, one or more genes of interest between one or more sets of restriction sites. It can be transferred from one DNA sequence (usually on a vector) to another by 'cutting' the fragment out using restriction enzymes and 'pasting' it back into the new context. The vectors containing the gene of interest typically carry an antibiotic resistance gene also to easily identify cells that have successfully integrated the vector into their genome.\n\nTo introduce a vector into a target cell, a state of competence must be inferred on the cell. This state is induced in the lab by incubating cells with calcium chloride before a brief heat shock, or by electroporation. This makes the cells more susceptible to the plasmid that is being inserted. Once the plasmid has been added, the cells are grown in the presence of an antibiotic to confirm the uptake and expression of the new genetic elements.\n\nThe usage of CRISPR/Cas9 systems has shown success in inserting genes into eukaryotic genomes. While CRISPR modification is still in its infancy, there is significant evidence for usage in combination with other techniques to produce high throughput genome editing systems. Genetic engineering of bacteria is a major area of research many industrial products such as biofuels, perfumes or even specific chemical molecules such as vanillin.\n\nHorizontal gene transfer (HGT) is the transfer of genetic elements between cells other than parental inheritance. HGT is responsible for much of the spread of antibiotic resistance among bacteria. Gene cassettes containing antibiotic resistance genes, or other virulence factors such as exotoxins, can be transferred from cell to cell via phage, transduction, taken up from the environment, transformation, or by bacterial conjugation. The ability to transfer gene cassettes between organisms has played a large role in the evolution of prokaryotes. Many commensal organisms, such as \"E. coli\", regularly harbor one or more gene cassettes that convey antibiotic resistance. Horizontal transfer of genetic elements from non-pathogenic commensals to unrelated species results in highly virulent pathogens that can carry multiple antibiotic resistance genes. The increasing prevalence of resistance creates challenging questions for researchers and physicians.\n\n\n", "id": "4677237", "title": "Gene cassette"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1890700", "text": "Amelogenin\n\nAmelogenin is the name for a series of closely related proteins involved in amelogenesis, the development of enamel. They are a type of extracellular matrix (ECM) protein, which, together with ameloblastins, enamelins, and tuftelins direct the mineralization of enamel to form a highly organized matrix of rods, interrod crystal, and protein. Although the precise role of amelogenin(s) in regulating the mineralization process is unknown, it is known that amelogenins are abundant during amelogenesis. Developing human enamel contains about 70% protein, 90% of which are amelogenins.\n\nAmelogenins are believed to be involved in the organizing of enamel rods during tooth development. The latest research indicates that these proteins regulate the initiation and growth of hydroxyapatite crystals during the mineralization of enamel. In addition, amelogenins appear to aid in the development of cementum by directing cementoblasts to the tooth's root surface.\n\nThe amelogenin gene has been most widely studied in humans, where it is a single copy gene, located on the X and Y chromosomes at Xp22.1-Xp22.3 and Yp 11.2 [5]. The amelogenin gene’s location on sex chromosomes has implications for variability both between the X chromosome form (AMELX) and the Y chromosome form (AMELY), and between alleles of AMELY among different populations. This is because AMELY exists in the non-recombining region of chromosome Y, effectively isolating it from normal selection pressures. Other sources of amelogenin variation arise from the various isoforms of AMELX obtained from alternative splicing of mRNA transcripts. Specific roles for isoforms have yet to be established. Among other organisms, amelogenin is well conserved among eutherians, and has homologs in monotremes, reptiles and amphibians.\n\nDifferences between the X chromosome and Y chromosome versions of the amelogenin gene (AMELX and AMELY respectively) enable it to be used in sex determination of unknown human samples. AMELX’s intron 1 contains a 6 bp deletion relative to intron 1 of AMELY. This can be detected at low cost using Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) of intron 1, followed by gel electrophoresis. Two bands of DNA, at 106bps and 112bps, are resolved if both the AMELX and AMELY versions of the gene are present (i.e. the sample is from a male) or one band of DNA, at 106bps, if the AMELX version only is present (i.e. the sample is from a female). \nHowever because of AMELY variation among individuals and populations, this method of sex determination is not 100% accurate. Mutation in regions of AMELY intron 1 commonly used as primer annealing sites may disable PCR amplification. A 6bp insertion to AMELY intron 1 results in an amplicon identical in length to that of AMELX. In some males AMELY may be deleted entirely. In any of these cases only one band is visualized during gel electrophoresis of PCR products, causing misidentification of the sample as female. The misidentification rate may vary among populations, but in general appears to be low. In one study in Spain, the amelogenin sex determination test using AMELX (977bps) and AMELY (790bps) bands was performed for 1224 individuals of known gender with a 99.84% (1222/1224) accuracy rate. Another study in India, however, found 5 of its 270 men studied (1.85%) possessed an AMELY deletion, terming them “deleted-amelogenin males” (DAMs). In response the authors suggested that while the amelogenin sex test may be accurate in general, other Y chromosome markers such as SRY, STR, or 50f2 can be used for less ambiguous gender identification.\n\nMutations in AMELX can cause amelogenesis imperfecta, a disorder of tooth enamel development.\n", "id": "1890700", "title": "Amelogenin"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=155625", "text": "Penetrance\n\nPenetrance in genetics is the proportion of individuals carrying a particular variant (or allele) of a gene (the genotype) that also express an associated trait (the phenotype). In medical genetics, the penetrance of a disease-causing mutation is the proportion of individuals with the mutation who exhibit clinical symptoms. For example, if a mutation in the gene responsible for a particular autosomal dominant disorder has 95% penetrance, then 95% of those with the mutation will develop the disease, while 5% will not.\n\nA condition, most commonly inherited in an autosomal dominant manner, is said to show complete penetrance if clinical symptoms are present in all individuals who have the disease-causing mutation. A condition which shows complete penetrance is neurofibromatosis type 1 - every person who has a mutation in the gene will show symptoms of the condition. The penetrance is 100%.\n\nCommon examples used to show degrees of penetrance are often highly penetrant. There are several reasons for this:\n\n\nPenetrance can be difficult to determine reliably, even for genetic diseases that are caused by a single polymorphic allele. For many hereditary diseases, the onset of symptoms is age related, and is affected by environmental factors such as nutrition and smoking, as well as genetic cofactors and epigenetic regulation of expression:\n\n\nA consensus definition of what constitutes the presence of a phenotype is essential for determining the penetrance of an allele. For hereditary hemochromatosis, a disease caused by excess intestinal iron absorption, the degree of penetrance has been a subject of controversy for many years and illustrates the challenges facing investigators seeking a quantitative measure of penetrance. Individuals who are homozygotes for the C282Y allele of the HFE gene are at risk for developing lethal concentrations of iron, particularly in the liver. Typically patients develop clinical disease in late-middle age.\n\nDetermining the penetrance of the C282Y allele can be influenced when the medical community evaluates homozygotes. Many of those afflicted do not seek treatment until symptoms are advanced, and with age-related conditions, some individuals die first of other causes. This dilemma is known as an ascertainment bias. There can be a bias favoring only the ascertainment of the most severely affected, or there can be a bias in the other direction, deeming that a homozygote is \"affected\" with the disease if they simply have elevated blood iron levels, but no physiological evidence of organ disease such as cirrhosis.\n\nFor alleles with incomplete penetrance, the penetrance of the allele is not the same as the attributable risk. For example, many alleles have been shown, through association studies, to cause some form of cancer, often with low penetrance. But cases of the cancer would arise even without the presence of the allele. Attributable risk is that proportion of total risk that can be attributed to the presence of the allele.\n\nMost biological traits (such as height or intelligence in humans) are multifactorial, influenced by many genes as well as environmental conditions and epigenetic expression. Only a statistical measure of association is possible with such polygenic traits.\n\n\n", "id": "155625", "title": "Penetrance"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5358528", "text": "Selective sweep\n\nIn genetics, a selective sweep is the reduction or elimination of variation among the nucleotides near a mutation in DNA. It results from a beneficial allele's having recently reached fixation due to strong positive natural selection.\n\nA selective sweep can occur when a rare or previously non-existing allele that increases the fitness of the carrier (relative to other members of the population) increases rapidly in frequency due to natural selection. As the prevalence of such a beneficial allele increases, genetic variants that happen to be present on the genomic background (the DNA neighborhood) of the beneficial allele will also become more prevalent. This is called \"genetic hitchhiking\". A selective sweep due to a strongly selected allele, which arose on a single genomic background therefore results in a region of the genome with a large reduction of genetic variation in that chromosome region. The idea that strong positive selection could reduce nearby genetic variation due to hitchhiking was proposed by John Maynard-Smith and John Haigh in 1974.\n\nNot all sweeps reduce genetic variation in the same way. Sweeps can be placed into three main categories: \n\n\nSweeps do not occur when selection simultaneously causes very small shifts in allele frequencies at many loci each with standing variation (polygenic adaptation).\n\nWhether or not a selective sweep has occurred can be investigated in various ways. One method is to measure linkage disequilibrium, i.e., whether a given haplotype is overrepresented in the population. Under neutral evolution, genetic recombination will result in the reshuffling of the different alleles within a haplotype, and no single haplotype will dominate the population. However, during a selective sweep, selection for a positively selected gene variant will also result in selection of neighbouring alleles and less opportunity for recombination. Therefore, the presence of strong linkage disequilibrium might indicate that there has been a recent selective sweep, and can be used to identify sites recently under selection.\n\nThere have been many scans for selective sweeps in humans and other species, using a variety of statistical approaches and assumptions.\n\nIn maize, a recent comparison of yellow and white corn genotypes surrounding \"Y1\"—the phytoene synthetase gene responsible for the yellow endosperm color, shows strong evidence for a selective sweep in yellow germplasm reducing diversity at this locus and linkage disequilibrium in surrounding regions. White maize lines had increased diversity and no evidence of linkage disequilibrium associated with a selective sweep.\n\nBecause selective sweeps allow for rapid adaptation, they have been cited as a key factor in the ability of pathogenic bacteria and viruses to attack their hosts and survive the medicines we use to treat them. In such systems, the competition between host and parasite is often characterized as an evolutionary \"arms race\", so the more rapidly one organism can change its method of attack or defense, the better. This has elsewhere been described by the Red Queen hypothesis. Needless to say, a more effective pathogen or a more resistant host will have an adaptive advantage over its conspecifics, providing the fuel for a selective sweep.\n\nOne example comes from the human influenza virus, which has been involved in an adaptive contest with humans for hundreds of years. While antigenic drift (the gradual change of surface antigens) is considered the traditional model for changes in the viral genotype, recent evidence suggests that selective sweeps play an important role as well. In several flu populations, the time to the most recent common ancestor (TMRCA) of \"sister\" strains, an indication of relatedness, suggested that they had all evolved from a common progenitor within just a few years. Periods of low genetic diversity, presumably resultant from genetic sweeps, gave way to increasing diversity as different strains adapted to their own locales.\n\nA similar case can be found in \"Toxoplasma gondii\", a remarkably potent protozoan parasite capable of infecting warm-blooded animals. Interestingly, T. gondii was recently discovered to exist in only three clonal lineages in all of Europe and North America. In other words, there are only three genetically distinct strains of this parasite in all of the Old World and much of the New World. These three strains are characterized by a single monomorphic version of the gene Chr1a, which emerged at approximately the same time as the three modern clones. It appears then, that a novel genotype emerged containing this form of Chr1a and swept the entire European and North American population of Toxoplasma gondii, bringing with it the rest of its genome via genetic hitchhiking. The South American strains of T. gondii, of which there are far more than exist elsewhere, also carry this allele of Chr1a.\n\nRarely are genetic variability and its opposing forces, including adaptation, more relevant than in the generation of domestic and agricultural species. Cultivated crops, for example, have essentially been genetically modified for more than ten thousand years, subjected to artificial selective pressures, and forced to adapt rapidly to new environments. Selective sweeps provide a baseline from which different varietals could have emerged.\n\nFor example, recent study of the corn (Zea mays) genotype uncovered dozens of ancient selective sweeps uniting modern cultivars on the basis of shared genetic data possibly dating back as far as domestic corn's wild counterpart, teosinte. In other words, though artificial selection has shaped the genome of corn into a number of distinctly adapted cultivars, selective sweeps acting early in its development provide a unifying homoplasy of genetic sequence. In a sense, the long-buried sweeps may give evidence of corn's, and teosinte's, ancestral state by elucidating a common genetic background between the two.\n\nAnother example of the role of selective sweeps in domestication comes from the chicken. A Swedish research group recently used parallel sequencing techniques to examine eight cultivated varieties of chicken and their closest wild ancestor with the goal of uncovering genetic similarities resultant from selective sweeps. They managed to uncover evidence of several selective sweeps, most notably in the gene responsible for thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor (TSHR), which regulates the metabolic and photoperiod-related elements of reproduction. What this suggests is that, at some point in the domestication of the chicken, a selective sweep, probably driven by human intervention, subtly changed the reproductive machinery of the bird, presumably to the advantage of its human manipulators.\n\nExamples of selective sweeps in humans are in variants affecting lactase persistence, and adaptation to high altitude.\n\n", "id": "5358528", "title": "Selective sweep"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5565217", "text": "Hypervariable region\n\nA hypervariable region (HVR) is a location within nuclear DNA or the D-loop of mitochondrial DNA in which base pairs of nucleotides repeat (in the case of nuclear DNA) or have substitutions (in the case of mitochondrial DNA). Changes or repeats in the hypervariable region are highly polymorphic.\n\nThere are two mitochondrial hypervariable regions used in human mitochondrial genealogical DNA testing. HVR1 is considered a \"low resolution\" region and HVR2 is considered a \"high resolution\" region. Getting HVR1 and HVR2 DNA tests can help determine one's haplogroup. In the revised Cambridge Reference Sequence of the human mitogenome, the most variable sites of HVR1 are numbered 16024-16383 (this subsequence is called HVR-I), and the most variable sites of HVR2 are numbered 57-372 (\"i.e.,\" HVR-II) and 438-574 (\"i.e.,\" HVR-III).\n\nIn some bony fishes, for example certain Protacanthopterygii and Gadidae, the mitochondrial control region evolves remarkably slowly. Even functional mitochondrial genes accumulate mutations faster and more freely. It is not known whether such hypovariable control regions are more widespread. In the Ayu (\"Plecoglossus altivelis\"), an East Asian protacanthopterygian, control region mutation rate is not markedly lowered, but sequence differences between subspecies are far lower in the control region than elsewhere. This phenomenon completely defies explanation at present.\n\nIn antibodies, hypervariable regions form the antigen-binding site and are found on both light and heavy chains. They also contribute to the specificity of each antibody. In a variable region, the 3 H segments of each heavy or light chain fold together at the N-terminus to form an antigen binding pocket.\n\n", "id": "5565217", "title": "Hypervariable region"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5875473", "text": "Subclade\n\nIn genetics, a subclade is a subgroup of a haplogroup.\n\nAlthough human mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and Y chromosome DNA (Y-DNA) haplogroups and subclades are named in a similar manner, their names belong to completely separate systems.\n\nmtDNA haplogroups are defined by the presence of a series of single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) markers in the hypervariable regions and the coding region of mitochondrial DNA. They are named with the capital letters A through Z, with further subclades named using numbers and lower case letters. \n\nY-DNA haplogroups are defined by the presence of a series of SNP markers on the Y chromosome. Subclades are defined by a \"terminal SNP\", the SNP furthest down in the Y chromosome phylogenetic tree.\n\nThe Y Chromosome Consortium (YCC) developed a system of naming major human Y-DNA haplogroups with the capital letters A through T, with further subclades named using numbers and lower case letters (YCC longhand nomenclature). YCC shorthand nomenclature names Y-DNA haplogroups and their subclades with the first letter of the major Y-DNA haplogroup followed by a dash and the name of the defining terminal SNP. Y-DNA haplogroup nomenclature is changing over time to accommodate the increasing number of SNPs being discovered and tested, and the resulting expansion of the Y chromosome phylogenetic tree. This change in nomenclature has resulted in inconsistent nomenclature being used in different sources. This inconsistency, and increasingly cumbersome longhand nomenclature, has prompted a move towards using the simpler shorthand nomenclature.\n\n", "id": "5875473", "title": "Subclade"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44259", "text": "Microsatellite\n\nA microsatellite is a tract of repetitive DNA in which certain DNA motifs (ranging in length from 1–6 or more base pairs) are repeated, typically 5–50 times. Microsatellites occur at thousands of locations within an organism's genome. They have a higher mutation rate than other areas of DNA leading to high genetic diversity. Microsatellites are often referred to as short tandem repeats (STRs) by forensic geneticists, or as simple sequence repeats (SSRs) by plant geneticists.\n\nMicrosatellites and their longer cousins, the minisatellites, together are classified as VNTR (variable number of tandem repeats) DNA. The name \"satellite\" DNA refers to the early observation that centrifugation of genomic DNA in a test tube separates a prominent layer of bulk DNA from accompanying \"satellite\" layers of repetitive DNA.\n\nThey are widely used for DNA profiling in cancer diagnosis, in kinship analysis (especially paternity testing) and in forensic identification. They are also used in genetic linkage analysis to locate a gene or a mutation responsible for a given trait or disease. Microsatellites are also used in population genetics to measure levels of relatedness between subspecies, groups and individuals.\n\nAlthough the first microsatellite was characterised in 1984 at the University of Leicester by Weller, Jeffreys and colleagues as a polymorphic GGAT repeat in the human myoglobin gene, the term \"microsatellite\" was introduced later, in 1989, by Litt and Luty. The name \"satellite\" DNA refers to the early observation that centrifugation of genomic DNA in a test tube separates a prominent layer of bulk DNA from accompanying \"satellite\" layers of repetitive DNA. The increasing availability of DNA amplification by PCR at the beginning of the 1990s triggered a large number of studies using the amplification of microsatellites as genetic markers for forensic medicine, for paternity testing, and for positional cloning to find the gene underlying a trait or disease. Prominent early applications include the identifications by microsatellite genotyping of the 8-year-old skeletal remains of a British murder victim (Hagelberg et al. 1991), and of the Auschwitz concentration camp doctor Josef Mengele who escaped to South America following World War II (Jeffreys et al. 1992).\n\nA microsatellite is a tract of tandemly repeated (i.e. adjacent) DNA motifs that range in length from one to six or up to ten nucleotides (the exact definition and delineation to the longer minisatellites varies from author to author), and are typically repeated 5-50 times. For example, the sequence TATATATATA is a dinucleotide microsatellite, and GTCGTCGTCGTCGTC is a trinucleotide microsatellite (with A being Adenine, G Guanine, C Cytosine, and T Thymine). Repeat units of four and five nucleotides are referred to as tetra- and pentanucleotide motifs, respectively. Most eukaryotes have microsatellites, with the notable exception of some yeast species. Microsatellites are distributed throughout the genome. The human genome for example contains 50,000-100,000 dinucleotide microsatellites, and lesser numbers of tri-, tetra- and pentanucleotide microsatellites. Many are located in non-coding parts of the human genome and therefore do not produce proteins, but they can also be located in regulatory regions and coding regions.\n\nMicrosatellites in non-coding regions do not have any specific function, and therefore cannot be selected against; this allows them to accumulate mutations unhindered over the generations and gives rise to variability that can be used for DNA fingerprinting and identification purposes. Other microsatellites are located in regulatory flanking or intronic regions of genes, or directly in codons of genes - microsatellite mutations in such cases can lead to phenotypic changes and diseases, notably in triplet expansion diseases such as fragile X syndrome and Huntington's disease.\n\nThe telomeres at the ends of the chromosomes, thought to be involved in ageing/senescence, consist of repetitive DNA, with the hexanucleotide repeat motif TTAGGG in vertebrates. They are thus classified as minisatellites. Similarly, insects have shorter repeat motifs in their telomeres that could arguably be considered microsatellites.\n\nUnlike point mutations, which affect only a single nucleotide, microsatellite mutations lead to the gain or loss of an entire repeat unit, and sometimes two or more repeats simultaneously. Thus, the mutation rate at microsatellite loci is expected to differ from other mutation rates, such as base substitution rates. The actual cause of mutations in microsatellites is debated.\n\nOne proposed cause of such length changes is replication slippage, caused by mismatches between DNA strands while being replicated during meiosis. DNA polymerase, the enzyme responsible for reading DNA during replication, can slip while moving along the template strand and continue at the wrong nucleotide. DNA polymerase slippage is more likely to occur when a repetitive sequence (such as CGCGCG) is replicated. Because microsatellites consist of such repetitive sequences, DNA polymerase may make errors at a higher rate in these sequence regions. Several studies have found evidence that slippage is the cause of microsatellite mutations. Typically, slippage in each microsatellite occurs about once per 1,000 generations. Thus, slippage changes in repetitive DNA are three orders of magnitude more common than point mutations in other parts of the genome. Most slippage results in a change of just one repeat unit, and slippage rates vary for different allele lengths and repeat unit sizes, and within different species. If there is a large size difference between individual alleles, then there may be increased instability during recombination at meiosis.\n\nAnother possible cause of microsatellite mutations are point mutations, where only one nucleotide is incorrectly copied during replication. A study comparing human and primate genomes found that most changes in repeat number in short microsatellites appear due to point mutations rather than slippage.\n\nMicrosatellite mutation rates vary with base position relative to the microsatellite, repeat type, and base identity. Mutation rate rises specifically with repeat number, peaking around six to eight repeats and then decreasing again. Increased heterozygosity in a population will also increase microsatellite mutation rates, especially when there is a large length difference between alleles. This is likely due to homologous chromosomes with arms of unequal lengths causing instability during meiosis.\n\nDirect estimates of microsatellite mutation rates have been made in numerous organisms, from insects to humans. In the desert locust \"Schistocerca gregaria\", the microsatellite mutation rate was estimated at 2.1 x 10 per generation per locus. The microsatellite mutation rate in human male germ lines is five to six times higher than in female germ lines and ranges from 0 to 7 x 10 per locus per gamete per generation. In the nematode \"Pristionchus pacificus\", the estimated microsatellite mutation rate ranges from 8.9 × 10 to 7.5 × 10 per locus per generation.\n\nMany microsatellites are located in non-coding DNA and are biologically silent. Others are located in regulatory or even coding DNA - microsatellite mutations in such cases can lead to phenotypic changes and diseases. A genome-wide study estimates that microsatellite variation contributes 10-15% of heritable gene expression variation in humans. \n\nIn mammals, 20% to 40% of proteins contain repeating sequences of amino acids encoded by short sequence repeats. Most of the short sequence repeats within protein-coding portions of the genome have a repeating unit of three nucleotides, since that length will not cause frame-shifts when mutating. Each trinucleotide repeating sequence is transcribed into a repeating series of the same amino acid. In yeasts, the most common repeated amino acids are glutamine, glutamic acid, asparagine, aspartic acid and serine.\n\nMutations in these repeating segments can affect the physical and chemical properties of proteins, with the potential for producing gradual and predictable changes in protein action. For example, length changes in tandemly repeating regions in the Runx2 gene lead to differences in facial length in domesticated dogs (\"Canis familiaris\"), with an association between longer sequence lengths and longer faces. This association also applies to a wider range of Carnivora species. Length changes in polyalanine tracts within the HoxA13 gene are linked to Hand-Foot-Genital Syndrome, a developmental disorder in humans. Length changes in other triplet repeats are linked to more than 40 neurological diseases in humans, notably triplet expansion diseases such as fragile X syndrome and Huntington's disease. Evolutionary changes from replication slippage also occur in simpler organisms. For example, microsatellite length changes are common within surface membrane proteins in yeast, providing rapid evolution in cell properties. Specifically, length changes in the FLO1 gene control the level of adhesion to substrates. Short sequence repeats also provide rapid evolutionary change to surface proteins in pathenogenic bacteria; this may allow them to keep up with immunological changes in their hosts. Length changes in short sequence repeats in a fungus (\"Neurospora crassa\") control the duration of its circadian clock cycles.\n\nLength changes of microsatellites within promoters and other cis-regulatory regions can change gene expression quickly, between generations. The human genome contains many (>16,000) short sequence repeats in regulatory regions, which provide ‘tuning knobs’ on the expression of many genes.\n\nLength changes in bacterial SSRs can affect fimbriae formation in \"Haemophilus influenzae\", by altering promoter spacing. Dinucleotide microsatellites are linked to abundant variation in cis-regulatory control regions in the human genome. Microsatellites in control regions of the Vasopressin 1a receptor gene in voles influence their social behavior, and level of monogamy.\n\nIn Ewing's sarcoma (a type of painful bone cancer in young humans), a point mutation has created an extended GGAA microsatellite which binds a transcription factor, which in turn activates the EGR2 gene which drives the cancer.\n\nMicrosatellites within introns also influence phenotype, through means that are not currently understood. For example, a GAA triplet expansion in the first intron of the X25 gene appears to interfere with transcription, and causes Friedreich Ataxia. Tandem repeats in the first intron of the Asparagine synthetase gene are linked to acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. A repeat polymorphism in the fourth intron of the NOS3 gene is linked to hypertension in a Tunisian population. Reduced repeat lengths in the EGFR gene are linked with osteosarcomas.\n\nAn archaic form of splicing preserved in Zebrafish is known to use microsatellite sequences within intronic mRNA for the removal of introns in the absence of U2AF2 and other splicing machinery. It is theorized that these sequences form highly stable cloverleaf configurations that bring the 3' and 5' intron splice sites into close proximity, effectively replacing the spliceosome. This method of RNA splicing is believed to have diverged from human evolution at the formation of tetrapods and to represent an artifact of an RNA world.\n\nAlmost 50% of the human genome is contained in various types of transposable elements (also called transposons, or ‘jumping genes’), and many of them contain repetitive DNA. It is probable that short sequence repeats in those locations are also involved in the regulation of gene expression.\n\nMicrosatellites are used for assessing chromosomal DNA deletions in cancer diagnosis. Microsatellites are widely used for DNA profiling, also known as \"genetic fingerprinting\", of crime stains (in forensics) and of tissues (in transplant patients). They are also widely used in kinship analysis (most commonly in paternity testing). Also, microsatellites are used for mapping locations within the genome, specifically in genetic linkage analysis to locate a gene or a mutation responsible for a given trait or disease. As a special case of mapping, they can be used for studies of gene duplication or deletion. Researchers use microsatellites in population genetics and in species conservation projects. Plant geneticists have proposed the use of microsatellites for marker assisted selection of desirable traits in plant breeding.\n\nIn tumour cells, whose controls on replication are damaged, microsatellites may be gained or lost at an especially high frequency during each round of mitosis. Hence a tumour cell line might show a different genetic fingerprint from that of the host tissue, and, especially in colorectal cancer, might present with loss of heterozygosity. Microsatellites have therefore been routinely used in cancer diagnosis to assess tumour progression.\n\nMicrosatellite analysis became popular in the field of forensics in the 1990s. It is used for the genetic fingerprinting of individuals where it permits forensic identification (typically matching a crime stain to a victim or perpetrator). It is also used to follow up bone marrow transplant patients.\n\nThe microsatellites in use today for forensic analysis are all tetra- or penta-nucleotide repeats, as these give a high degree of error-free data while being short enough to survive degradation in non-ideal conditions. Even shorter repeat sequences would tend to suffer from artifacts such as PCR stutter and preferential amplification, while longer repeat sequences would suffer more highly from environmental degradation and would amplify less well by PCR. Another forensic consideration is that the person's medical privacy must be respected, so that forensic STRs are chosen which are non-coding, do not influence gene regulation, and are not usually trinucleotide STRs which could be involved in triplet expansion diseases such as Huntington's disease. Forensic STR profiles are stored in DNA databanks such as the UK National DNA Database (NDNAD), the American CODIS or the Australian NCIDD.\n\nAutosomal microsatellites are widely used for DNA profiling in kinship analysis (most commonly in paternity testing). Paternally inherited Y-STRs (microsatellites on the Y chromosome) are often used in genealogical DNA testing.\n\nDuring the 1990s and the first several years of this millenium, microsatellites were the workhorse genetic markers for genome-wide scans to locate any gene responsible for a given phenotype or disease, using segregation observations across generations of a sampled pedigree. Although the rise of higher throughput and cost-effective single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) platforms led to the era of the SNP for genome scans, microsatellites remain highly informative measures of genomic variation for linkage and association studies. Their continued advantage lies in their greater allelic diversity than biallelic SNPs, thus microsatellites can differentiate alleles within a SNP-defined linkage disequilibrium block of interest. Thus, microsatellites have successfully led to discoveries of type 2 diabetes (TCF7L2) and prostate cancer genes (the 8q21 region).\n\nMicrosatellites were popularized in population genetics during the 1990s because as PCR became ubiquitous in laboratories researchers were able to design primers and amplify sets of microsatellites at low cost. Their uses are wide-ranging. A microsatellite with a neutral evolutionary history makes it applicable for measuring or inferring bottlenecks, local adaptation, the allelic fixation index (F), population size, and gene flow. As next generation sequencing becomes more affordable the use of microsatellites has decreased, however they remain a crucial tool in the field.\n\nMarker assisted selection or marker aided selection (MAS) is an indirect selection process where a trait of interest is selected based on a marker (morphological, biochemical or DNA/RNA variation) linked to a trait of interest (e.g. productivity, disease resistance, stress tolerance, and quality), rather than on the trait itself. Microsatellites have been proposed to be used as such markers to assist plant breeding; nevertheless, as of 2012, \"breeding programs based on DNA markers for improving quantitative traits in plants are rare\".\n\nRepetitive DNA is not easily analysed by next generation DNA sequencing methods, which struggle with homopolymeric tracts. Therefore, microsatellites are normally analysed by conventional PCR amplification and amplicon size determination, sometimes followed by Sanger DNA sequencing.\n\nIn forensics, the analysis is performed by extracting nuclear DNA from the cells of a sample of interest, then amplifying specific polymorphic regions of the extracted DNA by means of the polymerase chain reaction. Once these sequences have been amplified, they are resolved either through gel electrophoresis or capillary electrophoresis, which will allow the analyst to determine how many repeats of the microsatellites sequence in question there are. If the DNA was resolved by gel electrophoresis, the DNA can be visualized either by silver staining (low sensitivity, safe, inexpensive), or an intercalating dye such as ethidium bromide (fairly sensitive, moderate health risks, inexpensive), or as most modern forensics labs use, fluorescent dyes (highly sensitive, safe, expensive). Instruments built to resolve microsatellite fragments by capillary electrophoresis also use fluorescent dyes. Forensic profiles are stored in major databanks. The British data base for microsatellite loci identification was originally based on the British SGM+ system using 10 loci and a sex marker. The Americans increased this number to 13 loci. The Australian database is called the NCIDD, and since 2013 it has been using 18 core markers for DNA profiling.\n\nMicrosatellites can be amplified for identification by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) process, using the unique sequences of flanking regions as primers. DNA is repeatedly denatured at a high temperature to separate the double strand, then cooled to allow annealing of primers and the extension of nucleotide sequences through the microsatellite. This process results in production of enough DNA to be visible on agaroseor polyacrylamide gels; only small amounts of DNA are needed for amplification because in this way thermocycling creates an exponential increase in the replicated segment. With the abundance of PCR technology, primers that flank microsatellite loci are simple and quick to use, but the development of correctly functioning primers is often a tedious and costly process.\n\nIf searching for microsatellite markers in specific regions of a genome, for example within a particular intron, primers can be designed manually. This involves searching the genomic DNA sequence for microsatellite repeats, which can be done by eye or by using automated tools such as repeat masker. Once the potentially useful microsatellites are determined, the flanking sequences can be used to design oligonucleotide primers which will amplify the specific microsatellite repeat in a PCR reaction.\n\nRandom microsatellite primers can be developed by cloning random segments of DNA from the focal species. These random segments are inserted into a plasmid or bacteriophage vector, which is in turn implanted into \"Escherichia coli\" bacteria. Colonies are then developed, and screened with fluorescently–labelled oligonucleotide sequences that will hybridize to a microsatellite repeat, if present on the DNA segment. If positive clones can be obtained from this procedure, the DNA is sequenced and PCR primers are chosen from sequences flanking such regions to determine a specific locus. This process involves significant trial and error on the part of researchers, as microsatellite repeat sequences must be predicted and primers that are randomly isolated may not display significant polymorphism. Microsatellite loci are widely distributed throughout the genome and can be isolated from semi-degraded DNA of older specimens, as all that is needed is a suitable substrate for amplification through PCR.\n\nMore recent techniques involve using oligonucleotide sequences consisting of repeats complementary to repeats in the microsatellite to \"enrich\" the DNA extracted (Microsatellite enrichment). The oligonucleotide probe hybridizes with the repeat in the microsatellite, and the probe/microsatellite complex is then pulled out of solution. The enriched DNA is then cloned as normal, but the proportion of successes will now be much higher, drastically reducing the time required to develop the regions for use. However, which probes to use can be a trial and error process in itself.\n\nISSR (for inter-simple sequence repeat) is a general term for a genome region between microsatellite loci. The complementary sequences to two neighboring microsatellites are used as PCR primers; the variable region between them gets amplified. The limited length of amplification cycles during PCR prevents excessive replication of overly long contiguous DNA sequences, so the result will be a mix of a variety of amplified DNA strands which are generally short but vary much in length.\n\nSequences amplified by ISSR-PCR can be used for DNA fingerprinting. Since an ISSR may be a conserved or nonconserved region, this technique is not useful for distinguishing individuals, but rather for phylogeography analyses or maybe delimiting species; sequence diversity is lower than in SSR-PCR, but still higher than in actual gene sequences. In addition, microsatellite sequencing and ISSR sequencing are mutually assisting, as one produces primers for the other.\n\nRepetitive DNA is not easily analysed by next generation DNA sequencing methods, which struggle with homopolymeric tracts. Therefore, microsatellites are normally analysed by conventional PCR amplification and amplicon size determination. The use of PCR means that microsatellite length analysis is prone to PCR limitations like any other PCR-amplified DNA locus. A particular concern is the occurrence of ‘null alleles’:\n\n\n\n", "id": "44259", "title": "Microsatellite"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2937259", "text": "Concordance (genetics)\n\nConcordance, as used in genetics, usually means the presence of the same trait in both members of a pair of twins. However, the strict definition is \"the probability that a pair of individuals will both have a certain characteristic, given that one of the pair has the characteristic.\" For example, twins are concordant when both have or both lack a given trait. The ideal example of concordance is that of identical twins.\n\nA twin study compares the concordance rate of identical twins to that of fraternal twins. This can help suggest whether a disease or a certain trait has a genetic cause. Controversial uses of twin data have looked at concordance rates for homosexuality and intelligence.\n\nBecause identical twins are genetically virtually identical, it follows that a genetic pattern carried by one would very likely also be carried by the other. If a characteristic identified in one twin is caused by a certain gene, then it would also very likely be present in the other twin. Thus, the concordance rate of a given characteristic helps suggest whether or to what extent a characteristic is related to genetics.\n\nThere are several problems with this assumption:\n\nIn genotyping studies where DNA is directly assayed for positions of variance (see SNP), concordance is a measure of the percentage of SNPs that are measured as identical. Samples from the same individual or identical twins theoretically have a concordance of 100%, but due to assaying errors and somatic mutations, they are usually found in the range of 99% to 99.95%. Concordance can therefore be used as a method of assessing the accuracy of a genotyping assay platform.\n\nBecause a child inherits half of his or her DNA from each parent, parents and children, siblings, and fraternal (dizygotic) twins have a concordance that averages 50% using this measure.\n\n", "id": "2937259", "title": "Concordance (genetics)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3343370", "text": "Mating of yeast\n\nThe yeast \"Saccharomyces cerevisiae\" is a simple single-celled eukaryote with both a diploid and haploid mode of existence. The mating of yeast only occurs between haploids, which can be either the a or α (alpha) mating type and thus display simple sexual differentiation. Mating type is determined by a single locus, \"MAT\", which in turn governs the sexual behaviour of both haploid and diploid cells. Through a form of genetic recombination, haploid yeast can switch mating type as often as every cell cycle.\n\n\"S. cerevisiae\" (yeast) can stably exist as either a diploid or a haploid. Both haploid and diploid yeast cells reproduce by mitosis, with daughter cells budding off of mother cells. Haploid cells are capable of mating with other haploid cells of the opposite mating type (an a cell can only mate with an α cell, and vice versa) to produce a stable diploid cell. Diploid cells, usually upon facing stressful conditions such as nutrient depletion, can undergo meiosis to produce four haploid spores: two a spores and two α spores.\n\na cells produce ‘a-factor’, a mating pheromone which signals the presence of an a cell to neighbouring α cells. a cells respond to α-factor, the α cell mating pheromone, by growing a projection (known as a shmoo, due to its distinctive shape) towards the source of α-factor. Similarly, α cells produce α-factor, and respond to a-factor by growing a projection towards the source of the pheromone. The response of haploid cells only to the mating pheromones of the opposite mating type allows mating between a and α cells, but not between cells of the same mating type.\n\nThese phenotypic differences between a and α cells are due to a different set of genes being actively transcribed and repressed in cells of the two mating types. a cells activate genes which produce a-factor and produce a cell surface receptor (Ste2) which binds to α-factor and triggers signaling within the cell. a cells also repress the genes associated with being an α cell. Similarly, α cells activate genes which produce α-factor and produce a cell surface receptor (Ste3) which binds and responds to a-factor, and α cells repress the genes associated with being an a cell.\n\nThe different sets of transcriptional repression and activation which characterize a and α cells are caused by the presence of one of two alleles of a locus called \"MAT\": \"MATa or \"MATα\" located on chromosome III. The \"MATa allele of \"MAT\" encodes a gene called a1, which in haploids direct the transcription of the a-specific transcriptional program (such as expressing \"STE2\" and repressing \"STE3\") which defines an a cell. The \"MATα\" allele of \"MAT\" encodes the α1 and α2 genes, which in haploids direct the transcription of the α-specific transcriptional program (such as expressing \"STE3\", repressing \"STE2\") which causes the cell to be an α cell.\n\nHaploid cells are one of two mating types (a or α), and respond to the mating pheromone produced by haploid cells of the opposite mating type, and can mate with cells of the opposite mating type. Haploid cells cannot undergo meiosis. Diploid cells do not produce or respond to either mating pheromone and do not mate, but can undergo meiosis to produce four haploid cells.\n\nLike the differences between haploid a and α cells, different patterns of gene repression and activation are responsible for the phenotypic differences between haploid and diploid cells. In addition to the specific a and α transcriptional patterns, haploid cells of both mating types share a haploid transcriptional pattern which activates haploid-specific genes (such as \"HO\") and represses diploid-specific genes (such as \"IME1\"). Similarly, diploid cells activate diploid-specific genes and repress haploid-specific genes.\n\nThe different gene expression patterns of haploids and diploids are again due to the \"MAT\" locus. Haploid cells only contain one copy of each of the 16 chromosomes and thus can only possess one allele of \"MAT\" (either \"MATa or \"MATα\"), which determines their mating type. Diploid cells result from the mating of an a cell and an α cell, and thus possess 32 chromosomes (in 16 pairs), including one chromosome bearing the \"MATa allele and another chromosome bearing the \"MATα allele. The combination of the information encoded by the \"MATa allele (the a1 gene) and the \"MATα allele (the α1 and α2 genes) triggers the diploid transcriptional program. Similarly, the presence of only a single allele of \"MAT\", whether it is \"MATa or \"MATα\", triggers the haploid transcriptional program.\n\nThe alleles present at the \"MAT\" locus are sufficient to program the mating behaviour of the cell. For example, using genetic manipulations, a \"MATa allele can be added to a \"MATα haploid cell. Despite having a haploid complement of chromosomes, the cell now has both the \"MATa and \"MATα\" alleles, and will behave like a diploid cell: it will not produce or respond to mating pheromones, and when starved will attempt to undergo meiosis, with fatal results. Similarly, deletion of one copy of the \"MAT\" locus in a diploid cell, leaving only a single \"MATa or \"MATα\" allele, will cause a cell with a diploid complement of chromosomes to behave like a haploid cell.\n\nMating in yeast is stimulated by the presence of a pheromone which binds to either the Ste2 receptor (in a-cells) or the Ste3 receptor (in α-cells). The binding of this pheromone then leads to the activation of a heterotrimeric G-protein. The dimeric portion of this G-protein recruits Ste5 (and its related MAPK cascade components) to the membrane, and ultimately results in the phosphorylation of Fus3.\n\nThe switching mechanism arises as a result of competition between the Fus3 protein (a MAPK protein) and the phosphatase Ptc1. These proteins both attempt to control the 4 phosphorylation sites of Ste5, a scaffold protein with Fus3 attempting to phosphorylate the phosphosites, and Ptc1 attempting to dephosphorylate them.\n\nPresence of α-factor induces recruitment of Ptc1 to Ste5 via a 4 amino acid motif located within the Ste5 phosphosites. Ptc1 then dephosphorylates Ste5, ultimately resulting in the dissociation of the Fus3-Ste5 complex. Fus3 dissociates in a switch-like manner, dependant on the phosphorylation state of the 4 phosphosites. All 4 phosphosites must be dephosphorylated in order for Fus3 to dissociate. Fus3’s ability to compete with Ptc1 decreases as Ptc1 is recruited, and thus the rate of dephosphorylation increases with the presence of pheromone.\n\nKss1, a homologue of Fus3, does not affect shmooing, and does not contribute to the switch-like mating decision.\n\nIn yeast, mating as well as the production of shmoos occur via an all-or-none, switch-like mechanism. This switch-like mechanism allows yeast cells to avoid making an unwise commitment to a highly demanding procedure. However, not only does the mating decision need to be conservative (in order to avoid wasting energy), but it must also be fast to avoid losing the potential mate.\n\nThe decision to mate is extremely sensitive. There are 3 ways in which this ultrasensitivity is maintained: \n\n[Note: a and α yeast share the same mating response pathway, with the only difference being the type of receptor each mating type possesses. Thus the above description, given for a-type yeast stimulated with α-factor, works equally well for α-type yeast stimulated with a-factor]\n\nWild type haploid yeast are capable of switching mating type between a and α. Consequently, even if a single haploid cell of a given mating type founds a colony of yeast, mating type switching will cause cells of both a and α mating types to be present in the population. Combined with the strong drive for haploid cells to mate with cells of the opposite mating type and form diploids, mating type switching and consequent mating will cause the majority of cells in a colony to be diploid, regardless of whether a haploid or diploid cell founded the colony. The vast majority of yeast strains studied in laboratories have been altered such that they cannot perform mating type switching (by deletion of the \"HO\" gene; see below); this allows the stable propagation of haploid yeast, as haploid cells of the a mating type will remain a cells (and α cells will remain α cells), and will not form diploids.\n\nHaploid yeast switch mating type by replacing the information present at the \"MAT\" locus. For example, an a cell will switch to an α cell by replacing the \"MATa allele with the \"MATα allele. This replacement of one allele of \"MAT\" for the other is possible because yeast cells carry an additional silenced copy of both the \"MATa and \"MATα alleles: the \"HML\" (Hidden MAT Left) locus typically carries a silenced copy of the \"MATα allele, and the \"HMR\" (Hidden MAT Right) locus typically carries a silenced copy of the \"MATa allele. The silent \"HML\" and \"HMR\" loci are often referred to as the silent mating cassettes, as the information present there is 'read into' the active \"MAT\" locus.\n\nThese additional copies of the mating type information do not interfere with the function of whatever allele is present at the \"MAT\" locus because they are not expressed, so a haploid cell with the \"MATa allele present at the active \"MAT\" locus is still an a cell, despite also having a (silenced) copy of the \"MATα allele present at \"HML\". Only the allele present at the active \"MAT\" locus is transcribed, and thus only the allele present at \"MAT\" will influence cell behaviour. Hidden mating type loci are epigenetically silenced by SIR proteins, which form a heterochromatin scaffold that prevents transcription from the silent mating cassettes.\n\nThe process of mating type switching is a gene conversion event initiated by the \"HO\" gene. The \"HO\" gene is a tightly regulated haploid-specific gene that is only activated in haploid cells during the G phase of the cell cycle. The protein encoded by the \"HO\" gene is a DNA endonuclease, which physically cleaves DNA, but only at the \"MAT\" locus (due to the DNA sequence specificity of the HO endonuclease).\n\nOnce HO cuts the DNA at \"MAT\", exonucleases are attracted to the cut DNA ends and begin to degrade the DNA on both sides of the cut site. This DNA degradation by exonucleases eliminates the DNA which encoded the \"MAT\" allele; however, the resulting gap in the DNA is repaired by copying in the genetic information present at either \"HML\" or \"HMR\", filling in a new allele of either the \"MATa or \"MATα gene. Thus, the silenced alleles of \"MATa and \"MATα present at \"HML\" and \"HMR\" serve as a source of genetic information to repair the HO-induced DNA damage at the active \"MAT\" locus.\n\nThe repair of the \"MAT\" locus after cutting by the HO endonuclease almost always results in a mating type switch. When an a cell cuts the \"MATa allele present at the \"MAT\" locus, the cut at \"MAT\" will almost always be repaired by copying the information present at \"HML\". This results in \"MAT\" being repaired to the \"MATα allele, switching the mating type of the cell from a to α. Similarly, an α cell which has its \"MATα allele cut by the HO endonuclease will almost always repair the damage using the information present at \"HMR\", copying the \"MATa gene to the \"MAT\" locus and switching the mating type of α cell to a.\n\nThis is the result of the action of a recombination enhancer (RE) located on the left arm of chromosome III. Deletion of this region causes a cells to incorrectly repair using HMR. In a cells, Mcm1 binds to the RE and promotes recombination of the HML region. In α cells, the α2 factor binds at the RE and establishes a repressive domain over RE such that recombination is unlikely to occur. An innate bias means that the default behaviour is repair from HMR. The exact mechanisms of these interactions are still under investigation.\n\nRuderfer et al. analyzed the ancestry of natural \"S. cerevisiae\" strains and concluded that matings involving out-crossing occur only about once every 50,000 cell divisions. Thus it appears that, in nature, mating is most often between closely related yeast cells. Mating occurs when haploid cells of opposite mating type \"MATa and \"MATα come into contact. Ruderfer et al. pointed out that such contacts are frequent between closely related yeast cells for two reasons. The first is that cells of opposite mating type are present together in the same ascus, the sac that contains the cells directly produced by a single meiosis, and these cells can mate with each other. The second reason is that haploid cells of one mating type, upon cell division, often produce cells of the opposite mating type with which they can mate (see section “Mating type switching”, above). The relative rarity in nature of meiotic events that result from out-crossing appears to be inconsistent with the idea that production of genetic variation is the primary selective force maintaining mating capability in this organism. However this finding is consistent with the alternative idea that the primary selective force maintaining mating capability is enhanced recombinational repair of DNA damage during meiosis, since this benefit is realized during each meiosis subsequent to a mating, whether or not out-crossing occurs.\n\n\"Schizosaccharomyces pombe\" is a facultative sexual yeast that can undergo mating when nutrients are limiting. Exposure of \"S. pombe\" to hydrogen peroxide, an agent that causes oxidative stress leading to oxidative DNA damage, strongly induces mating, meiosis and formation of meiotic spores. This finding suggests that meiosis, and particularly meiotic recombination, may be an adaptation for repairing DNA damage.\n\n\"Cryptococcus neoformans\" is a basidiomycetous fungus that grows as a budding yeast in culture and in an infected host. \"C. neoformans\" causes life-threatening meningoencephalitis in immune compromised patients. It undergoes a filamentous transition during the sexual cycle to produce spores, the suspected infectious agent. The vast majority of environmental and clinical isolates of \"C. neoformans\" are mating type α. Filaments ordinarily have haploid nuclei, but these can undergo a process of diploidization (perhaps by endoduplication or stimulated nuclear fusion) to form diploid cells termed blastospores. The diploid nuclei of blastospores can then undergo meiosis, including recombination, to form haploid basidiospores that can then be dispersed. This process is referred to as monokaryotic fruiting. Required for this process is a gene designated \"dmc1\", a conserved homologue of genes \"RecA\" in bacteria, and \"Rad51\" in eukaryotes (see RecA, Rad51). \"Dmc1\" mediates homologous chromosome pairing during meiosis and repair of double-strand breaks in DNA (see Meiosis; also Michod et al.). Lin et al. suggested that one benefit of meiosis in \"C. neoformans\" could be to promote DNA repair in a DNA damaging environment that could include the defensive responses of the infected host.\n\n\n", "id": "3343370", "title": "Mating of yeast"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6306236", "text": "Mobile genetic elements\n\nMobile genetic elements (MGEs) are a type of genetic materials that can move around within a genome, or that can be transferred from one species or replicon to another. MGEs are found in all organisms. In the human, approximately 50% of the genome is thought to be MGEs. MGEs play a distinct role in evolution. Gene duplication events can also happen through the mechanism of MGEs. MGEs can also cause mutations in protein coding regions, which alters the protein functions. In addition, they can also rearrange genes in the host genome. One of the examples of MGEs in evolutionary context is that virulence factors and antibiotic resistance genes of MGEs can be transported to share them with neighboring bacteria. Newly acquired genes though this mechanism can increase fitness by gaining new or additional functions. On the other hand, MGEs can also decrease fitness by introducing disease-causing alleles or mutations.\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\nCRISPR-Cas systems in bacteria and archaea are adaptive immune systems to protect against deadly consequences from MGEs. Using comparative genomic and phylogenetic analysis, researchers found that CRISPR-Cas variants are associated with distinct types of MGEs such as transposable elements. In addition, CRISPR-Cas controls transposable elements for their propagation.\n\nMGEs such as plasmids by a horizontal transmission are generally beneficial to an organism. The ability of transferring plasmids (sharing) is important in an evolutionary perspective. Tazzyman and Bonhoeffer found that fixation (receiving) of the transferred plasmids in a new organism is just as important as the ability to transfer them. Beneficial rare and transferable plasmids have a higher fixation probability, whereas deleterious transferable genetic elements have a lower fixation probability to avoid lethality to the host organisms. \n\nTransposition by transposable elements is mutagenic. Thus, organisms have evolved to repress the transposition events, and failure to repress the events causes cancers in somatic cells. Cecco et al. found that during early age transcription of retrotransposable elements are minimal in mice, but in advanced age the transcription level increases. Interestingly, this age-dependent expression level of transposable elements is reduced by calorie restriction diet. \n\nThe consequence of mobile genetic elements can alter the transcriptional patterns, which frequently leads to genetic disorders such as immune disorders, breast cancer, multiple sclerosis, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. In humans, stress can lead to transactional activation of MGEs such as endogenous retrovirus, and this activation has been linked to neuro-degeneration.\n\nThe total of all mobile genetic elements in a genome may be referred to as the mobilome. Barbara McClintock was awarded the 1983 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine \"for her discovery of mobile genetic elements\".\n\nMobile genetic elements play a critical role in the spread of virulence factors, such as exotoxins and exoenzymes, amongst bacteria. Strategies to combat certain bacterial infections by targeting these specific virulence factors and mobile genetic elements have been proposed.\n\n\n", "id": "6306236", "title": "Mobile genetic elements"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6363299", "text": "Nuclease protection assay\n\nNuclease protection assay is a laboratory technique used in biochemistry and genetics to identify individual RNA molecules in a heterogeneous RNA sample extracted from cells. The technique can identify one or more RNA molecules of known sequence even at low total concentration. The extracted RNA is first mixed with antisense RNA or DNA probes that are complementary to the sequence or sequences of interest and the complementary strands are hybridized to form double-stranded RNA (or a DNA-RNA hybrid). The mixture is then exposed to ribonucleases that specifically cleave only \"single\"-stranded RNA but have no activity against double-stranded RNA. When the reaction runs to completion, susceptible RNA regions are degraded to very short oligomers or to individual nucleotides; the surviving RNA fragments are those that were complementary to the added antisense strand and thus contained the sequence of interest.\n\nThe probes are prepared by cloning part of the gene of interest in a vector under the control of any of the following promoters, SP6, T7 or T3. These promoters are recognized by DNA dependent RNA polymerases originally characterized from bacteriophages. The probes produced are radioactive as they are prepared by in vitro transcription using radioactive UTPs. Uncomplemented DNA or RNA is cleaved off by nucleases. When the probe is a DNA molecule, S1 nuclease is used; when the probe is RNA, any single-strand-specific ribonuclease can be used. Thus the surviving probe-mRNA complement is simply detected by autoradiography.\n\nNuclease protection assays are used to map introns and 5' and 3' ends of transcribed gene regions. Quantitative results can be obtained regarding the amount of the target RNA present in the original cellular extract - if the target is a messenger RNA, this can indicate the level of transcription of the gene in the cell. \n\nThey are also used to detect the presence of double stranded RNA, presence of which could mean RNA interference. \n\nNorthern blotting is a laboratory technique that produces similar information. It is slower and less quantitative, but also produces accurate information about the \"size\" of the target RNA. Nuclease protection assay products are limited to the size of the initial probes due to the destruction of the non-hybridized RNA during the nuclease digestion step.\n\n", "id": "6363299", "title": "Nuclease protection assay"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6363561", "text": "Enhanceosome\n\nThe enhanceosome is a higher-order protein complex assembled at the enhancer and regulates expression of a target gene. The binding and assembly of the activating proteins is cooperative due to energetically favorable protein-protein interactions formed in the complex.\n\nThe best known example of the enhanceosome acts on the human interferon-beta gene, which is upregulated in cells that are infected by viruses. Three activator proteins—NF-κB, an interferon activator protein such as IRF-3, and the ATF-2/c-Jun complex—cooperatively bind to the upstream enhancer region upon viral infection. The interaction is mediated by a fourth protein HMG-I, which assists in stabilizing the complex by promoting inter-protein interactions. The assembled enhanceosome recruits transcriptional machinery such as RNA polymerase to the promoter region to initiate gene expression.\n\n", "id": "6363561", "title": "Enhanceosome"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=849380", "text": "Aniridia\n\nAniridia is the absence of the iris, usually involving both eyes. It can be congenital or caused by a penetrant injury. Isolated aniridia is a congenital disorder which is not limited to a defect in iris development, but is a panocular condition with macular and optic nerve hypoplasia, cataract, and corneal changes. Vision may be severely compromised and the disorder is frequently associated with a number of ocular complications: nystagmus, amblyopia, buphthalmos, and cataract. Aniridia in some individuals occurs as part of a syndrome, such as WAGR syndrome (kidney nephroblastoma (Wilms tumour), genitourinary anomalies and intellectual disability), or Gillespie syndrome (cerebellar ataxia).\n\nThe AN2 region of the short arm of chromosome 11 (11p13) includes the PAX6 gene (named for its PAired boX status), whose gene product helps regulate a cascade of other genetic processes involved in the development of the eye (as well as other non-ocular structures). This PAX6 gene is around 95% similar to the pax gene found in zebrafish, a creature whose ancestors diverged from human evolutionary development around 400 million years ago. Thus the PAX6 gene is highly conserved across evolutionary lineages.\n\nDefects in the PAX6 gene cause aniridia-like ocular defects in mice (as well as \"Drosophila\"). Aniridia is a heterozygous disorder, meaning that only one of the two chromosome 11 copies is affected. When both copies are altered (homozygous condition), the result is a uniformly fatal condition with near complete failure of entire eye formation. In 2001, two cases of homozygous aniridia patients were reported; the fetuses died prior to birth and had severe brain damage. In mice, homozygous \"small eye\" defect (mouse Pax-6) leads to loss of the eyes and nose and the murine fetuses suffer severe brain damage.\n\nAniridia may be broadly divided into hereditary and sporadic forms. Hereditary aniridia is usually transmitted in an autosomal dominant manner (each offspring has a 50% chance of being affected), although rare autosomal recessive forms (such as Gillespie syndrome) have also been reported. Sporadic aniridia mutations may affect the WT1 region adjacent to the AN2 aniridia region, causing a kidney cancer called nephroblastoma (Wilms tumor). These patients often also have genitourinary abnormalities and intellectual disability (WAGR syndrome).\n\nSeveral different mutations may affect the PAX6 gene. Some mutations appear to inhibit gene function more than others, with subsequent variability in the severity of the disease. Thus, some aniridic individuals are only missing a relatively small amount of iris, do not have foveal hypoplasia, and retain relatively normal vision. Presumably, the genetic defect in these individuals causes less \"heterozygous insufficiency,\" meaning they retain enough gene function to yield a milder phenotype.\n\n\nMolecular (DNA) testing for PAX6 gene mutations (by sequencing of the entire coding region and deletion/duplication analysis) is available for isolated aniridia and the Gillespie syndrome. For the WAGR syndrome, high-resolution cytogenetic analysis and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) can be utilized to identify deletions within chromosome band 11p13, where both the PAX6 and WT1 genes are located.\n\n", "id": "849380", "title": "Aniridia"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3926794", "text": "Deme (biology)\n\nIn biology, a deme is a term for a local population of polytypic species that actively interbreed with one another and share a distinct gene pool. When demes are isolated for a very long time, they can become distinct subspecies or species. The term deme is mainly used in evolutionary biology and is often used as a synonym for population.\n\nIn evolutionary computation, a \"deme\" often refers to any isolated subpopulation subjected to selection as a unit rather than as individuals.\n\nA deme in biological evolution is conceptually related to a meme in cultural evolution.\n\nVarious populations of gorillas can be understood by their geographical separation and have been assessed to determine distinct and disjointed gene pools. The polar bear, \"Ursus maritimus\", is understood to have 19 identifiable demes, even though their circumpolar distribution allows some interchange among the demes.\n\n", "id": "3926794", "title": "Deme (biology)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3150728", "text": "RecLOH\n\nRecLOH is a term in genetics that is an abbreviation for \"Recombinant Loss of Heterozygosity\".\n\nThis is a type of mutation which occurs with DNA by recombination. From a pair of equivalent (\"homologous\"), but slightly different (heterozygous) genes, a pair of identical genes results. In this case there is a non-reciprocal exchange of genetic code between the chromosomes, in contrast to chromosomal crossover, because genetic information is lost.\n\nIn genetic genealogy, the term is used particularly concerning similar seeming events in Y chromosome DNA. This type of mutation happens within one chromosome, and does not involve a reciprocal transfer. Rather, one homologous segment \"writes over\" the other. The mechanism is presumed to be different from RecLOH events in autosomal chromosomes, since the target is the very same chromosome instead of the homologous one. \n\nDuring the mutation one of these copies overwrites the other. Thus the differences between the two are lost. Because differences are lost, heterozygosity is lost.\n\nRecombination on the Y-chromosome does not only take place during meiosis, but virtually at every mitosis when the Y chromosome condenses, because it doesn't require pairing between chromosomes. Recombination frequency even exceeds the frame shift mutation frequency (slipped strand mispairing) of (average fast) Y-STRs, however many recombination products may lead to infertile germ cells and \"daughter out\".\n\nRecombination events (RecLOH) can be observed if YSTR databases are searched for twin alleles at 3 or more duplicated markers on the same palindrome (hairpin).\nE.g. DYS459, DYS464 and DYS724 (CDY) are located on the same palindrome P1. A high proportion of 9-9, 15-15-17-17, 36-36 combinations and similar twin allelic patterns will be found. PCR typing technologies have been developed (e.g. DYS464X) that are able to verify that there are most frequently really two alleles of each, so we can be sure that there is no gene deletion. Family genealogies have proven many times, that parallel changes on all markers located on the same palindrome are frequently observed and the result of those changes are always twin alleles. So a 9-10, 15-16-17-17, 36-38 haplotype can change in one recombination event to the one mentioned above, because all three markers (DYS459, DYS464 and DYS724) are affected by one and the same recLOH event.\n\n\n", "id": "3150728", "title": "RecLOH"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3445259", "text": "Tafazzin\n\nTafazzin is a protein that in humans is encoded by the \"TAZ\" gene. Tafazzin is highly expressed in cardiac and skeletal muscle. It is involved in the metabolism of cardiolipin.\n\nTafazzin functions as a phospholipid-lysophospholipid transacylase.\n\nThe mutation of the tafazzin gene is associated with a number of clinical disorders including Barth syndrome (BTHS) (type II 3-Methylglutaconic aciduria), dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), hypertrophic DCM, endocardial fibroelastosis, and left ventricular noncompaction (LVNC). Tafazzin is responsible for remodeling of a phospholipid cardiolipin (CL), the signature lipid of the mitochondrial inner membrane. As a result, BTHS patients exhibit defects in CL metabolism, including aberrant CL fatty acyl composition, accumulation of monolysocardiolipin (MLCL) and reduced total CL levels.\n\nThe protein was identified by Italian scientists Silvia Bione \"et al.\" in 1996. Owing to the complex procedure required for the identification of \"tafazzin\", the protein was named after \"Tafazzi\", a masochistic comic character in an Italian television show.\n\n\n", "id": "3445259", "title": "Tafazzin"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6561124", "text": "Allelic exclusion\n\nAllelic exclusion is a process by which only one allele of a gene is expressed while the other allele is silenced. For autosomal genes, diploid organisms inherit one copy from each parent.\n\nAt least two distinct selection events can lead to allelic exclusion. On one hand, one allele of the gene can be transcriptionally silent, which would result in the expression of only the second allele. On the other hand, both alleles can be transcribed, in which case posttranscriptional and posttranslational mechanisms will lead to the elimination of the protein product of one allele.\n\nThe mechanism by which allelic exclusion occurs is not fully understood.\n\nAllelic exclusion has been observed most often in genes for cell surface receptors and has been extensively studied in immune cells such as B lymphocytes. In B lymphocytes, successful heavy chain gene rearrangement of the genetic material from one chromosome results in the shutting down of rearrangement of genetic material from the second chromosome. If no successful rearrangement occurs, rearrangement of genetic material on the second chromosome takes place. If no successful rearrangement occurs on either chromosome, the cell dies.\n\nAs a result of allelic exclusion, all the antigen receptors on an individual lymphocyte will have the same amino acid sequence in the variable domain of the heavy chain protein. As the specificity of the antigen receptor is modulated by the variable domain of the light chain encoded by one of the immunoglobulin light chain loci, the specificities of B cells containing the same heavy chain recombination event can differ according to their light chain recombination event.\n\nA study published in 2006 showed that CpA-methylation helps for allelic exclusion in sensory neurons.\n\n", "id": "6561124", "title": "Allelic exclusion"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1632972", "text": "Nuclear transfer\n\nNuclear transfer is a form of cloning. The steps involve removing the DNA from an oocyte (unfertilised egg), and injecting the nucleus which contains the DNA to be cloned. In rare instances, the newly constructed cell will divide normally, replicating the new DNA while remaining in a pluripotent state. If the cloned cells are placed in the uterus of a female mammal, a cloned organism develops to term in rare instances. This is how Dolly the Sheep and many other species were cloned. Cows are commonly cloned to select those that have the best milk production.\n\nDespite this, the low efficiency of the technique has prompted some researchers, notably Ian Wilmut, creator of Dolly the cloned sheep, to abandon it.\n\nNuclear transfer is a delicate process that is a major hurdle in the development of cloning technology. Materials used in this procedure are a microscope, a holding pipette (small vacuum) to keep the oocyte in place, and a micropipette (hair-thin needle) capable of extracting the nucleus of a cell using a vacuum. For some species, such as mouse, a drill is used to pierce the outer layers of the oocyte.\n\nVarious chemical reagents are used to increase cloning efficiency. Microtubule inhibitors, such as nocodazole, are used to arrest the oocyte in M phase, during which its nuclear membrane is dissolved. Chemicals are also used to stimulate oocyte activation. When applied the membrane is completely dissolved.\n\nSomatic Cell Nuclear Transfer (SCNT) is the process by which the nucleus of an oocyte (egg cell) is removed and is replaced with the nucleus of a somatic (body) cell (examples include skin, heart, or nerve cell). The two entities fuse to become one and factors in the oocyte cause the somatic nucleus to reprogram to a pluripotent state. The cell contains genetic information identical to the donated somatic cell. After stimulating this cell to begin dividing, in the proper conditions an embryo will develop. Stem cells can be extracted 5–6 days later and used for research.\n\nGenomic reprogramming is the key biological process behind nuclear transfer. Currently unidentified reprogramming factors present in oocytes are capable of initiating a cascade of events that can reset the mature, specialized cell back to an undifferentiated, embryonic state. These factors are thought to be mainly proteins of the nucleus.\n\n", "id": "1632972", "title": "Nuclear transfer"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4723494", "text": "Eukaryotic chromosome fine structure\n\nEukaryotic chromosome fine structure refers to the structure of sequences for eukaryotic chromosomes. Some fine sequences are included in more than one class, so the classification listed is not intended to be completely separate.\n\nSome sequences are required for a properly functioning chromosome:\n\nThroughout the eukaryotic kingdom, the overall structure of chromosome ends is conserved and is characterized by the telomeric tract - a series of short G-rich repeats. This is succeeded by an extensive subtelomeric region consisting of various types and lengths of repeats - the telomere associated sequences (TAS). These regions are generally low in gene density, low in transcription, low in recombination, late replicating, are involved in protecting the end from degradation and end-to-end fusions and in completing replication. The subtelomeric repeats can rescue chromosome ends when telomerase fails, buffer subtelomerically located genes against transcriptional silencing and protect the genome from deleterious rearrangements due to ectopic recombination. They may also be involved in fillers for increasing chromosome size to some minimum threshold level necessary for chromosome stability; act as barriers against transcriptional silencing; provide a location for the adaptive amplification of genes; and be involved in secondary mechanism of telomere maintenance via recombination when telomerase activity is absent.\n\nOther sequences are used in replication or during interphase with the physical structure of the chromosome.\n\nRegions of the genome with protein-coding genes include several elements:\n\nMany regions of the DNA are transcribed with RNA as the functional form:\n\nOther RNAs are transcribed and not translated, but have undiscovered functions.\n\nRepeated sequences are of two basic types: unique sequences that are repeated in one area; and repeated sequences that are interspersed throughout the genome.\n\nSatellites are unique sequences that are repeated in tandem in one area. Depending on the length of the repeat, they are classified as either:\n\nInterspersed sequences are tandem repeats, with sequences that are found interspersed across the genome. They can be classified based on the length of the repeat as:\n\nBoth of these types are classified as retrotransposons.\n\nRetrotransposons are sequences in the DNA that are the result of retrotransposition of RNA. LINEs and SINEs are examples where the sequences are repeats, but there are non-repeated sequences that can also be retrotransposons.\n\nTypical eukaryotic chromosomes contain much more DNA than is classified in the categories above. The DNA may be used as spacing, or have other as-yet-unknown function. Or, they may simply be random sequences of no consequence.\n", "id": "4723494", "title": "Eukaryotic chromosome fine structure"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6964154", "text": "Haploview\n\nHaploview is a commonly used bioinformatics software which is designed to analyze and visualize patterns of linkage disequilibrium (LD) in genetic data. Haploview can also perform association studies, choosing tagSNPs and estimating haplotype frequencies. Haploview is developed and maintained by Dr. Mark Daly's lab at the MIT/Harvard Broad Institute.\n\nHaploview currently supports the following functionalities:\n\n\n\n", "id": "6964154", "title": "Haploview"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7664887", "text": "Fosmid\n\nFosmids are similar to cosmids but are based on the bacterial F-plasmid. The cloning vector is limited, as a host (usually \"E. coli\") can only contain one fosmid molecule. Fosmids can hold DNA inserts of up to 40 kb in size; often the source of the insert is random genomic DNA. A fosmid library is prepared by extracting the genomic DNA from the target organism and cloning it into the fosmid vector. The ligation mix is then packaged into phage particles and the DNA is transfected into the bacterial host. Bacterial clones propagate the fosmid library. \nThe low copy number offers higher stability than vectors with relatively higher copy numbers, including cosmids. Fosmids may be useful for constructing stable libraries from complex genomes. Fosmids have high structural stability and have been found to maintain human DNA effectively even after 100 generations of bacterial growth. Fosmid clones were used to help assess the accuracy of the Public Human Genome Sequence.\n\nThe fertility plasmid or F-plasmid was discovered by Esther Lederberg and encodes information for the biosynthesis of sex pilus to aid in bacterial conjugation. Conjugation involves using the sex pilus to form a bridge between two bacteria cells; the bridge allows the F+ cell to transfer a single-stranded copy of the plasmid so that both cells contain a copy of the plasmid. On the way into the recipient cell, the corresponding DNA strand is synthesized by the recipient. The donor cell maintains a functional copy of the plasmid. It later was discovered that the F factor was the first episome and can exist as an independent plasmid making it a very stable vector for cloning. Conjugation aids in the formation of bacterial clone libraries by ensuring all cells contain the desired fosmid.\n\nFosmids are DNA vectors that use the F-plasmid origin of replication and partitioning mechanisms to allow cloning of large DNA fragments. A library that provides 20–70-fold redundant coverage of the genome can easily be prepared.<ref name=\"doi:10.1016/1050-3862(95)00122-0\"></ref>\n\nThe first step in sequencing entire genomes is cloning the genome into manageable units of some 50-200 kilobases in length. It is ideal to use a fosmid library because of its stability and limitation of one plasmid per cell. By limiting the number of plasmids in the cells the potential for recombination is decreased, thus preserving the genome insert.\n\nFosmids contain several functional elements:\n\nAn example of a mapped fosmid can be found here http://what-when-how.com/molecular-biology/f-plasmid-molecular-biology/\n\nThe methods of cutting and inserting DNA into fosmid vectors have been perfected. There are now many companies that can create a fosmid library from any sample of DNA in a very short period of time at a relatively low cost. This has been vital in allowing researchers to sequence numerous genomes for study. Through a variety of methods, more than 6651 organisms genomes have been fully sequenced, with 58,695 ongoing.\n\nSometimes it is difficult to accurately distinguish individual chromosomes based on chromosome length, arm ratio, and C-banding pattern. Fosmids can be used as reliable cytological markers for individual chromosome identification and fluorescent in situ hybridization based metaphase chromosome karyotypes can be used to show whether the positions of these fosmids were successfully constructed.\n\nThe fosmid system is excellent for rapidly creating chromosome-specific mini-BAC libraries from flow-sorted chromosomal DNA. The major advantage of Fosmids over other cosmid systems lies in its capability of stably propagating human DNA fragments. Highly repetitive in nature, human DNA is well known for its extreme instability in multicopy vector systems. It has been found that the stability increases dramatically when the human DNA inserts are present in single copies in recombination deficient \"E. coli\" cells. Therefore, Fosmids serve as reliable substrates for large scale genomic DNA sequencing.\n\nUseful tools such as the NCBI Nucleotide Database allow researchers to search for other fosmid libraries to compare for homologous DNA sequences between species.\n", "id": "7664887", "title": "Fosmid"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6242952", "text": "Single-base extension\n\nSingle-base extension (SBE) is a method for determining the identity of a nucleotide base at a specific position along a nucleic acid. The method is used to identify a single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP).\n\nIn the method, an oligonucleotide primer hybridizes to a complementary region along the nucleic acid, to form a duplex, with the primer’s terminal 3’ end directly adjacent to the nucleotide base to be identified. The oligonucleotide primer is enzymatically extended by a single base in the presence of all four nucleotide terminators; the nucleotide terminator complementary to the base in the template being interrogated is incorporated and identified. The presence of all four terminators ensures that no further extension occurs beyond the single incorporated base. Many approaches can be taken for determining the identity of a terminator, including fluorescence labeling, mass labeling for mass spectrometry, measuring enzyme activity using a protein moiety, and isotope labeling.\n\nThe method was invented by Philip Goelet, Michael Knapp, Richard Douglas and Stephen Anderson while working at the company Molecular Tool. This approach was designed for high-throughput SNP genotyping and was originally called \"Genetic Bit Analysis\" (GBA). Illumina, Inc. utilizes this method in their Infinium technology (http://www.illumina.com/technology/beadarray-technology/infinium-hd-assay.html) to measure DNA methylation levels in the human genome.\n\n", "id": "6242952", "title": "Single-base extension"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2228439", "text": "Genetic redundancy\n\nGenetic redundancy is a term typically used to describe situations where a given biochemical function is redundantly encoded by two or more genes. In these cases, mutations (or defects) in one of these genes will have a smaller effect on the fitness of the organism than expected from the genes’ function. Characteristic examples of genetic redundancy include (Enns, Kanaoka et al. 2005) and (Pearce, Senis et al. 2004). Many more examples are thoroughly discussed in (Kafri, Levy & Pilpel. 2006).\n\nThe main source of genetic redundancy is the process of gene duplication which generates multiplicity in gene copy number. A second and less frequent source of genetic redundancy are convergent evolutionary processes leading to genes that are close in function but unrelated in sequence (Galperin, Walker & Koonin 1998). Genetic redundancy is typically associated with signaling networks, in which many proteins act together to accomplish teleological functions. In contrast to expectations, genetic redundancy is not associated with gene duplications [Wagner, 2007], neither do redundant genes mutate faster than essential genes [Hurst 1999]. Therefore, genetic redundancy has classically aroused much debate in the context of evolutionary biology (Nowak et al., 1997; Kafri, Springer & Pilpel . 2009).\n\nFrom an evolutionary standpoint, genes with overlapping functions implies minimal, if any, selective pressures acting on these genes. One therefore expects that the genes participating in such buffering of mutations will be subject to severe mutational drift diverging their functions and/or expression patterns with considerably high rates. Indeed it has been shown that the functional divergence of paralogous pairs in both yeast and human is an extremely rapid process. Taking these notions into account, the very existence of genetic buffering, and the functional redundancies required for it, presents a paradox in light of the evolutionary concepts. On one hand, for genetic buffering to take place there is a necessity for redundancies of gene function, on the other hand such redundancies are clearly unstable in face of natural selection and are therefore unlikely to be found in evolved genomes.\n\nDuplicated genes that diverge in function may undergo subfunctionalization or can become degenerate. When two protein coding genes are degenerate there will be conditions where the gene products appear functionally redundant and also conditions where the gene products take on unique functions. \n\n", "id": "2228439", "title": "Genetic redundancy"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6974837", "text": "Systems Biology Ontology\n\nThe Systems Biology Ontology (SBO) is a set of controlled, relational vocabularies of terms commonly used in Systems Biology, and in particular in computational modeling. SBO is part of the BioModels.net effort.\n\nThe rise of Systems Biology, seeking to comprehend biological processes as a whole, highlighted the need to not only develop corresponding quantitative models, but also to create standards allowing their exchange and integration. This concern drove the community to design common data format such as SBML and CellML. SBML is now largely accepted and used in the field. However, as important as the definition of a common syntax is, it is also necessary to make clear the semantics of models. SBO is an attempt to provide the means of annotating models with terms that indicate the intended semantics of an important subset of models in common use in computational systems biology. The development of SBO was first discussed at the 9th SBML Forum Meeting in Heidelberg Oct. 14–15, 2004. During the forum, Pedro Mendes mentioned that modellers possessed a lot of knowledge that was necessary to understand the model, and more importantly to simulate it, but this knowledge was not encoded in SBML. Nicolas Le Novère proposed to create a controlled vocabulary to store the content of Pedro Mendes' mind before he wandered out of the community. The development of the ontology was announced more officially in a message from Le Novère to Michael Hucka and Andrew Finney on October 19.\n\nSBO is currently made up of seven different vocabularies:\n\nTo curate and maintain SBO, a dedicated resource has been developed and the public interface of the SBO browser can be accessed at http://www.ebi.ac.uk/sbo.\nA relational database management system (MySQL) at the back-end is\naccessed through a web interface based on Java Server Pages (JSP) and JavaBeans. Its\ncontent is encoded in UTF-8, therefore supporting a large set of\ncharacters in the definitions of terms. Distributed curation is made possible\nby using a custom-tailored locking system allowing concurrent access.\nThis system allows a continuous update of the ontology with immediate\navailability and suppress merging problems.\n\nSeveral exports formats (OBO flat file, SBO-XML and OWL) are generated daily or on request and can be downloaded from the web interface.\n\nTo allow programmatic access to the resource, Web Services have been implemented based on Apache Axis for the communication layer and Castor for the validation. The libraries, full documentation, samples and tutorial are available online.\n\nThe sourceforge project can be accessed at http://sourceforge.net/projects/sbo/.\n\nSince Level 2 Version 2 SBML provides a mechanism to annotate model components with SBO terms, therefore increasing the semantics of the\nmodel beyond the sole topology of interaction and mathematical expression. Modelling tools such as SBMLsqueezer use SBO terms too. Simulation tools can check the consistency of a rate law, convert reaction from one modelling framework to another (e.g., continuous to discrete), or distinguish between identical mathematical expressions based on different assumptions (e.g., Henri-Michaelis-Menten Vs. Briggs-Haldane). Other tools such as semanticSBML can use the SBO annotation to integrate individual models into a larger one. The use of SBO is not restricted to the development of models. Resources providing quantitative experimental information such as SABIO Reaction Kinetics will be able to annotate the parameters (what do they mean exactly, how were they calculated) and determine relationships between them.\n\nAll the graphical symbols used in the SBGN languages are associated with an SBO term. This permits, for instance, to help generate SBGN maps from SBML models.\n\nThe Systems Biology Pathway Exchange (SBPAX) allows SBO terms to be added to Biological Pathway Exchange (BioPAX). This links BioPAX to information useful for modelling, especially by adding quantitative descriptions described by SBO.\n\nSBO is built in collaboration by the Computational Neurobiology Group (Nicolas Le Novère, EMBL-EBI, United-Kingdom) and the SBMLTeam (Michael Hucka, Caltech, USA).\n\nSBO has benefited from the funds of the European Molecular Biology Laboratory and the National Institute of General Medical Sciences.\n\n", "id": "6974837", "title": "Systems Biology Ontology"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8036853", "text": "Molecular cytogenetics\n\nMolecular cytogenetics involves the combination of molecular biology and cytogenetics.It involves use of various reagents which helps to properly distinguish normal and cancer causing cells. Molcular cytogenetics is a useful tool for diagnosing and treatment of various malignancies such as brain tumors,haematological malignancies etc. It includes a series of techniques referred to as fluorescence \"in situ\" hybridization, or FISH, in which DNA probes are labeled with different colored fluorescent tags to visualize one or more specific regions of the genome. FISH can either be performed as a direct approach to metaphase chromosomes or interphase nuclei. Alternatively, an indirect approach can be taken in which the entire genome can be assessed for copy number changes using virtual karyotyping. Virtual karyotypes are generated from arrays made of thousands to millions of probes, and computational tools are used to recreate the genome \"in silico\".\n\nIn eukaryotes, the Rad51 and Dmc1 proteins have a central role in meiosis. Teresawa et al. using immunofluorescence microscopy found that in Lilium longiflorum, Rad51 and Lim15 (an ortholog of Dmc1) co-localize on meiotic prophase I chromosomes where they form discrete foci. Using electron microscopic immunogold labeling localization, Anderson et al. found Rad51 and/or Lim15 proteins to be components of early meiotic nodules that are involved in recombination related events. The stages of meiosis in which the co-localization of the Rad51 and Lim15 proteins occurs are the leptotene and zygotene stages of meiosis, suggesting that meiotic recombination begins at the leptotene stage with the cooperation of these proteins and continues into zygotene. These proteins catalyze pairing of homologous chromosomes, DNA strand exchange, and recombinational repair of DNA damages.\n\n", "id": "8036853", "title": "Molecular cytogenetics"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4613989", "text": "Genevestigator\n\nGenevestigator is an online platform enabling researchers to globally explore public and proprietary expression data for research and clinical applications. It's a web-based application developed for biologists and medical researchers to find out how genes are expressed in different tissues, stimuli, drug treatments, diseases, or genetic modifications. Results are processed from a large database of manually curated and quality-controlled microarrays and RNAseq samples from a large variety of tissues and conditions. Currently, data is available for human, mouse, rat, pig, drosophila, arabidopsis, barley, rice, wheat, tomato, tobacco, moss and soybean.\n\nGenevestigator was started in January 2004 by scientists from ETH Zurich and is currently developed and commercialized by Nebion AG.\n\nGenevestigator is currently used by >40,000 registered users (mostly biologists) from the animal and plant research fields. Its tools have been used in molecular biology, toxicogenomics, and biomarker discovery/validation. As of May 2014, its original articles have been cited more than 2,500 times by researchers using the tools.\n\nThree tool sets, each containing several tools, are available:\n\nUnderlying most of the tools is the concept of \"meta-profiles\". Meta-profiles are representative vectors of expression for a given type of condition. For example, for a gene of interest, its anatomy meta-profile is the vector of expression values across all anatomy categories that are available in the database for this gene and organism. In simple terms, it shows how strongly a gene is expressed in different anatomy parts. This holds true also for stages of development or perturbations, which are also summarized into representative expression responses.\n\nThe concept of meta-profiles has been used in Genevestigator to characterize expression across anatomy, development, stimuli (drug treatments, diseases, stimuli) and mutations.\n\n\n", "id": "4613989", "title": "Genevestigator"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8377764", "text": "Muller's morphs\n\nHermann J. Muller (1890–1967), who was a 1946 Nobel Prize winner, coined the terms amorph, hypomorph, hypermorph, antimorph and neomorph to classify mutations based on their behaviour in various genetic situations, as well as gene interaction between themselves. These classifications are still widely used in \"Drosophila\" genetics to describe mutations. For a more general description of mutations, see mutation, and for a discussion of allele interactions, see dominance relationship.\n\n\"Key: In the following sections, alleles are referred to as +=wildtype, m=mutant, Df=gene deletion, Dp=gene duplication. Phenotypes are compared with '>', meaning 'phenotype is more severe than\"'\n\nAmorphic describes a mutation that causes complete loss of gene function. Amorph is sometimes used interchangeably with \"genetic null\". An amorphic mutation might cause complete loss of protein function by disrupting translation (\"protein null\") and/or preventing transcription (\"RNA null\").\n\nAn amorphic allele elicits the same phenotype when homozygous and when heterozygous to a chromosomal deletion or deficiency that disrupts the same gene. This relationship can be represented as follows:\n\nm/m = m/Df\n\nAn amorphic allele is commonly recessive to its wildtype counterpart. It is possible for an amorph to be dominant if the gene in question is required in two copies to elicit a normal phenotype (i.e. haploinsufficient).\n\nHypomorphic describes a mutation that causes a partial loss of gene function. A hypomorph is a reduction in gene function through reduced (protein, RNA) expression or reduced functional performance, but not a complete loss.\n\nThe phenotype of a hypomorph is more severe in \"trans\" to a deletion allele than when homozygous.\n\nm/DF > m/m\n\nHypomorphs are usually recessive, but occasional alleles are dominant due to haploinsufficiency.\n\nA hypermorphic mutation causes an increase in normal gene function. Hypermorphic alleles are gain of function alleles. A hypermorph can result from an increase in gene dose (a gene duplication), from increased mRNA or protein expression, or constitutive protein activity.\n\nThe phenotype of a hypermorph is worsened by increasing the wildtype gene dose, and is reduced by lowering wildtype gene dose.\n\nm/Dp > m/+ > m/Df\n\nAntimorphs are dominant mutations that act in opposition to normal gene activity. Antimorphs are also called dominant negative mutations.\n\nIncreasing wildtype gene function reduces the phenotypic severity of an antimorph, so the phenotype of an antimorph is worse when heterozygous than when in \"trans\" to a gene duplication.\n\nm/+ > m/Dp\n\nAn antimorphic mutation might affect the function of a protein that acts as a dimer so that a dimer consisting of one normal and one mutated protein is no longer functional.\n\nA neomorphic mutation causes a dominant gain of gene function that is different from the normal function. A neomorphic mutation can cause ectopic mRNA or protein expression, or new protein functions from altered protein structure.\n\nChanging wildtype gene dose has no effect on the phenotype of a neomorph.\n\nm/Df = m/+ = m/Dp\n\nAfter Muller's classification of gene mutation nature, it was described a isomorph, as a nonsense point mutant with identical gene expression as the original allele.\n\nm/Df = m/Dp\n\nTherefore, in respect of the relationships between the original and mutated genes it can not be talk about the effects of dominanceness or/and recessiveness.\n", "id": "8377764", "title": "Muller's morphs"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8421381", "text": "Hypersensitive site\n\nIn genetics a hypersensitive site is a short region of chromatin and is detected by its super sensitivity to cleavage by DNase I and other various nucleases (DNase II and micrococcal nucleases). In a hypersensitive site, the nucleosomal structure is less compacted, increasing the availability of the DNA to binding by proteins, such as transcription factors and DNase I. These sites account for many inherited tendencies.\n\nHypersensitive sites are found on every active gene, and many of these genes often have more than one hypersensitive site. Most often, hypersensitive sites are found only in chromatin of cells in which the associated gene is being expressed, and do not occur when the gene is inactive.\n\nIn DNA being transcribed, 5'hypersensitive sites appear before transcription begins, and the DNA sequences within the hypersensitive sites are required for gene expression. Note: hypersensitive sites precede active promoters.\nHypersensitive sites are generated as a result of the binding of transcription factors that displace histone octamers.\n\nThey can also be located by indirect end labelling. A fragment of DNA is cut once at the hypersensitive site with DNase and at another site with a restriction enzyme. The distance from the known restriction site to the DNase cut is then measured to give the location.\n", "id": "8421381", "title": "Hypersensitive site"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1693323", "text": "Genetic viability\n\nTo be genetically viable, having a realistic chance of avoiding the problems of inbreeding, a population of plants or animals requires a certain amount of genetic diversity, and consequently a certain minimum number of members. See effective population size. The minimum is normally somewhere in the region of a hundred unrelated individuals. Where a population has become extremely small in a population bottleneck, due for example to near-extinction of the species, it may have lost its genetic viability, and if numbers recover it will be through inbreeding, possibly leaving an unhealthy population.\n", "id": "1693323", "title": "Genetic viability"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6703615", "text": "Emopamil binding protein\n\nEBP is a gene associated with Conradi-Hünermann syndrome.\n\nEBP refers to \"emopamil binding protein\".\n\n\n", "id": "6703615", "title": "Emopamil binding protein"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1491913", "text": "Primosome\n\nIn molecular biology, a primosome is a protein complex responsible for creating RNA primers on single stranded DNA during DNA replication.\n\nThe primosome consists of seven proteins: DnaG primase, DnaB helicase, DnaC helicase assistant, DnaT, PriA, Pri B, and PriC. At each replication fork, the primosome is utilized once on the leading strand of DNA and repeatedly, initiating each Okazaki fragment, on the lagging DNA strand. Initially the complex formed by PriA, PriB, and PriC binds to DNA. Then the DnaB-DnaC helicase complex attaches along with DnaT. This structure is referred to as the pre-primosome. Finally, DnaG will bind to the pre-primosome forming a complete primosome. The primosome attaches 1-10 RNA nucleotides to the single stranded DNA creating a DNA-RNA hybrid. This sequence of RNA is used as a primer to initiate DNA polymerase III. The RNA bases are ultimately replaced with DNA bases by RNase H nuclease (eukaryotes) or DNA polymerase I nuclease (prokaryotes). DNA Ligase then acts to join the two ends together.\n\nAssembly of the Escherichia coli primosome requires six proteins, PriA, PriB, PriC, DnaB, DnaC, and DnaT, acting at a primosome assembly site (pas) on an SSBcoated single-stranded (8s) DNA. Assembly is initiated by interactions of PriA and PriB with ssDNA and the pas. PriC, DnaB, DnaC, and DnaT then act on the PriAPriB- DNA complex to yield the primosome.\n\nPrimosomes are nucleoproteins assemblies that activate DNA replication forks. Their primary role is to recruit the replicative helicase onto single-stranded DNA. The \"replication restart\" primosome, defined in Escherichia coli, is involved in the reactivation of arrested replication forks. Binding of the PriA protein to forked DNA triggers its assembly. PriA is conserved in bacteria, but its primosomal partners are not. In Bacillus subtilis, genetic analysis has revealed three primosomal proteins, DnaB, DnaD, and DnaI, that have no obvious homologues in E. coli. They are involved in primosome function both at arrested replication forks and at the chromosomal origin. Our biochemical analysis of the DnaB and DnaD proteins unravels their role in primosome assembly. They are both multimeric and bind individually to DNA. Furthermore, DnaD stimulates DnaB binding activities. DnaD alone and the DnaD/DnaB pair interact specifically with PriA of B. subtilis on several DNA substrates. This suggests that the nucleoprotein assembly is sequential in the PriA, DnaD, DnaB order. The preferred DNA substrate mimics an arrested DNA replication fork with unreplicated lagging strand, structurally identical to a product of recombinational repair of a stalled replication fork.\n", "id": "1491913", "title": "Primosome"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7474152", "text": "Hybrid speciation\n\nHybrid speciation is a form of speciation where hybridization between two different species leads to a new species, reproductively isolated from the parent species. From the 1940s, reproductive isolation between hybrids and their parents was thought to be particularly difficult to achieve and thus hybrid species were thought to be extremely rare. With DNA analysis becoming more accessible in the 1990s, hybrid speciation has been shown to be a fairly common phenomenon, particularly in plants.\n\nIn botanical nomenclature, a hybrid species is also called a nothospecies. Hybrid species are by their nature polyphyletic.\n\nA hybrid may occasionally be better fitted to the local environment than the parental lineage and as such natural selection may favor these individuals. If reproductive isolation is subsequently achieved, a separate species may arise. Reproductive isolation may be genetic, ecological, behavioural, spatial, or a combination of these.\n\nIf reproductive isolation fails to establish, the hybrid population may merge with either or both parent species. This will lead to an influx of foreign genes in the parent population, a situation called an introgression. Introgression is a source of genetic variation, and can in itself facilitate speciation. There is evidence that introgression is a ubiquitous phenomenon in plants, animals, and even humans, where genetic material from Neanderthals and Denisovans is responsible for much of the immune genes in non-African populations.\n\nFor a hybrid form to persist, it must be able to exploit the available resources better than either parent species, which, in most cases, it will have to compete with. While grizzly bears and polar bears may have offspring, a grizzly–polar bear hybrid will likely be less suited in either of the ecological roles than the parents themselves. Although the hybrid is fertile, this poor adaptation would prevent the establishment of a permanent population.\n\nLikewise, lions and tigers have historically overlapped in a portion of their range and can theoretically produce wild hybrids: ligers, which are a cross between a male lion and female tiger, and tigons, which are a cross between a male tiger and a female lion; however, tigers and lions have thus far only hybridized in captivity. In both ligers and tigons, the females are fertile and the males are sterile. One of these hybrids (the tigon) carries growth-inhibitor genes from both parents and thus is smaller than either parent species and might in the wild come into competition with smaller carnivores, e.g. the leopard. The other hybrid, the liger, ends up larger than either of its parents: about a thousand pounds (450 kilograms) fully-grown. No tiger-lion hybrids are known from the wild, particularly because each species is confined to geographically separated ranges (tigers aren't found in Africa, and the Asiatic lion is only found in the Gir Forest National Park, where tigers also are absent).\n\nSome situations may favour hybrid population. One example is rapid turnover of available environment types, like the historical fluctuation of water level in Lake Malawi, a situation that generally favors speciation. A similar situation can be found where closely related species occupy a chain of islands. This will allow any present hybrid population to move into new, unoccupied habitats, avoiding direct competition with parent species and giving a hybrid population time and space to establish. Genetics too can occasionally favour hybrids. In the Amboseli National Park in Kenya, yellow baboons and anubis baboons regularly interbreed. The hybrid males reach maturity earlier than their pure bred cousins, setting up a situation where the hybrid population may over time replace one or both of the parent species in the area.\n\nGenetics are more variable and malleable in plants than in animals, probably reflecting the higher activity level in animals. Hybrids genetics will necessarily be less stable than those of species evolving through isolation, which explains why hybrid species appear more common in plants than in animals. Many agricultural crops are hybrids with double or even triple chromosome sets. Having multiple sets of chromosomes is called polyploidy (or polyploidity). Polyploidy is usually fatal in animals where extra chromosome sets upset fetal development, but is often found in plants. A form of hybrid speciation that is relatively common in plants, occurs when an infertile hybrid becomes fertile after doubling of the chromosome number.\n\nHybridization without change in chromosome number is called homoploid hybrid speciation. This is the situation found in most animal hybrids. For a hybrid to be viable, the chromosomes of the two organisms will have to be very similar, i.e., the parent species must be closely related, or the difference in chromosome arrangement will make mitosis problematic. With polyploid hybridization, this constraint is less acute.\n\nSuper-numerary chromosome numbers can be unstable, which can lead to instability in the genetics of the hybrid. The European edible frog appears to be a species, but is actually triploid semi-permanent hybrids between pool frogs and marsh frogs. In most populations, the edible frog population is dependent on the presence of at least one of the parents species to be maintained as each individual need two gene sets from one parent species and one from the other. Also, the male sex determination gene in the hybrids is only found in the genome of the pool frog, further undermining stability. Such instability can also lead to rapid reduction of chromosome numbers, creating reproductive barriers and thus allowing speciation.\n\nHybrid speciation in animals is primarily homoploid. While not very common, a few animal species are the result of hybridization, mostly insects such as the \"Lonicera\" fly, some fish, with a mammal, the clymene dolphin, and a few birds. One is an unnamed species of Darwin's finches with a population on the Galapagos island of Daphne Major, described in 2017 and likely founded in the early 1980s by a male \"Geospiza conirostris\" from Espanola and a female \"G. fortis\" from Daphne Major. Another is the great skua, which has a surprising genetic similarity to the physically very different pomarine skua; most ornithologists now assume it to be a hybrid between the pomarine skua and one of the northern skuas. The golden-crowned manakin was formed 180,000 years ago by hybridization between snow-capped and Opal-crowned manakins.\n\nRapidly diverging species can sometimes form multiple hybrid species, giving rise to a species complex, like several physically divergent but closely related genera of cichlid fishes in Lake Malawi. The duck genus \"Anas\" (mallards and teals) has a very recent divergence history, many of the species are inter-fertile and quite a few of them are thought to be hybrids. While hybrid species generally appear rare in mammals, the American red wolf too appear to be a hybrid species of the \"Canis\" species complex, between gray wolf and coyote. Hybridisation may have led to the species rich \"Heliconius\" butterflies, though the conclusion has been criticized.\n\nSince plants are more tolerant of polyploidy, hybrid species are more common than in animals. Estimates indicate as much as 2–4% of all flowering plants and 7% of all fern species are the results of polyploid hybridization. Many crop species such as wheat are hybrids, and hybridization is an important factor in speciation in some plant groups. Garden flowers in the genus \"Saxifraga\" are often hybrids, and a tetraploid natural hybrid, \"Saxifraga osloenis\" is thought to have formed at the end of the last ice age. Homoploid speciation also occurs in plants, and has for example given rise to several species of sunflower.\n\n\n", "id": "7474152", "title": "Hybrid speciation"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7862454", "text": "Falconer's formula\n\nFalconer's formula is used in twin studies to determine the genetic heritability of a trait based on the difference between twin correlations.\n\nThe formula is H = 2(r - r), where H is the broad sense heritability, r is the (monozygotic, MZ) identical twin correlation, and r is the (dizygotic, DZ) fraternal twin correlation. The correlation of same sex MZ twins is always higher than the DZ twin correlation with various sexes and thus all gender differences are evaluated as heritable. To avoid this error, only genetic studies comparing MZ twins with the same sex DZ twins are valid. Correlations between A = h (additive genetics) and C (common environment) must be included in the derivation shown below.\n\n\n", "id": "7862454", "title": "Falconer's formula"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8573492", "text": "Non-histone protein\n\nIn chromatin, those proteins which remain after the histones have been removed, are classified as non-histone proteins. Scaffold proteins, DNA polymerase, Heterochromatin Protein 1 and Polycomb are common non-histone proteins. This classification group also includes numerous other structural, regulatory, and motor proteins.\n\n", "id": "8573492", "title": "Non-histone protein"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8485040", "text": "Balancer chromosome\n\nBalancer chromosomes are special, modified chromosomes used for genetically screening a population of organisms to select for heterozygotes. Balancer chromosomes can be used as a genetic tool to prevent crossing over (genetic recombination) between homologous chromosomes during meiosis. Balancers are most often used in \"Drosophila melanogaster\" (fruit fly) genetics to allow populations of flies carrying heterozygous mutations to be maintained without constantly screening for the mutations but can also be used in mice. Balancer chromosomes have three important properties: they suppress recombination with their homologs, carry dominant markers, and negatively affect reproductive fitness when carried homozygously.\n\nBalancer chromosomes were first used by Hermann Muller. In the modern usage of balancer chromosomes, random mutations are first caused, usually by feeding the larva ethyl methane sulphonate. When a phenotype of interest is observed, the line is crossed with another line containing balancer chromosomes to maintain their lineage. In one instance they were used to genetically screen a population of \"Caenorhabditis elegans\". At this point in time scientists had already realized the benefits of being able to genetically screen populations of organisms for genetic study. Equally as important, they also realized that they could limit crossing over in these populations as well give them a very consistent genetic population.\n\nThe use of balancer chromosomes has evolved into a well known and widely used method for genetic screening of model organisms. They are even being used to investigate the role of heterochromatin packing and the effect it has on genes as well as studies on the effect telomeres have on gene silencing.\n\nTo suppress crossing over, balancer chromosomes are the products of multiple, nested chromosomal inversions so that synapsis between homologous chromosomes is disrupted. This construct is called a crossover suppressor. If crossing over between a balancer chromosome and the balancer's homolog does occur during meiosis each chromatid ends up lacking some genes and carrying two copies of other genes. Recombination in inverted regions leads to dicentric or acentric chromosomes (chromosomes with two centromeres or no centromere). Progeny carrying chromosomes that are the products of recombination between balancer and normal chromosomes are not viable (they die).\n\nDominant markers such as genes for green fluorescent protein or enzymes that make pigments allow researchers to easily recognize flies that carry the balancer chromosome. By suppressing reproductive fitness when carried homozygously a balancer chromosome ensures that the population it is carried in does not become fixed for the balancer chromosome.\n\nBalancer chromosomes always contain a lethal recessive allele. This means that if an organism receives two copies of the balancer chromosome, one from the mother and one from the father, then the organism will not live. So any organism that is homozygous for that chromosome will not live to pass on its genes. However, offspring that only get one copy of one balancer chromosome and one copy of a wild type or mutant chromosome will live to pass on its genes. After only a few generations the population will be entirely heterozygous so that you can be guaranteed of its genotype on at least those two chromosomes.\n\nBalancer chromosomes also come with some sort of physical marker. This marker can be actually associated with the DNA in the chromosome such as the Green Fluorescent Protein that fluoresces in ultraviolet light, or it can be an easily distinguishable physical characteristic. These physical characteristics can be anything that is seen easily. In \"Drosophila melanogaster\", for example, eye color and hair length are commonly used. This physical marker serves as a double check that you indeed have the heterozygous balancer chromosomes in the organism.\n\nBalancer chromosomes are named for the chromosome they serve to stabilize and for the phenotypic or genetic marker the balancer carries. The naming of balancer chromosomes in \"D. melanogaster\" has been standardized as follows: the first letter of the chromosome's name represents the number of the chromosome it stabilizes. \"F\" stands for the first chromosome, \"S\" stands for second, and \"T\" stands for third (the small fourth chromosome does not undergo recombination and therefore does not require balancing.) This letter is then followed by an \"M\", for \"multiply inverted.\" The \"M\" is followed by a number to distinguish balancers of the same chromosome. Additionally, the genetic marker or markers of the balancer are listed after the name and separated by a comma. Generally mutations with easily observable dominant phenotypic traits that are often homozygous lethal are used to ensure that all progeny are heterozygous. For example, the commonly used \"\"TM3, Sb\"\" balancer is a balancer chromosome that stabilizes the third chromosome and carries a mutant \"Sb\" (\"stubble\") gene as a marker. All flies containing the \"TM3, Sb\" balancer will have shortened (or stubbly) hairs on the back of the fly, which are easily seen when viewed through a microscope. The \"3\" is to distinguish this from other third chromosome balancers, such as \"TM1\" and \"TM2\".\n\nA line is said to be \"double-balanced\" if it is heterozygous for two different balancer chromosomes (for example, \"TM6,Tb/TM3,Ser\") on a balancer chromosome and a homozygous lethal, heterozygous visible mutant on the other, wild-type chromosome (for example, D/TM3,Ser). Most balancer chromosomes also carry a recessive allele such as the \"ebony\" mutation that is only manifest in these stocks with two balancer chromosomes. These stocks are often used to provide sources of easily traceable traits when breeding two different lines together so that the correct progeny of each cross might be selected. Stocks double-balanced at both the second and third chromosomes in Drosophila are widely available.\n\nBalancer chromosomes already give geneticists a reliable method for genetically screening organisms for a mutation and keeping that line constant. A new technique using balancer chromosomes is explored in the paper \"The Autosomal Flp-Dfs Technique for Generating Germline Mosaics in Drosophila Melanogaster.\" This paper showed for the first time that it is possible to screen for a recessive mutation that only shows phenotype when homozygous. Using old balancer chromosome methods, genetic screening only allowed the picking out of heterozygous dominant mutations. This experiment uses clonal screening to detect homozygous individuals and keep them in a constant line.\n\nThey achieved this by using a gene isolated from yeast. This gene is called FLP recombinase and causes large chromosomal inversions. Through trial and error they found that the chromosomes could be recombined such that each had the recessive mutation while the other half contained half of a balancer chromosome with a physical marker and a lethal recessive. The other homolog did not contain the lethal recessive in the lines that survived. Figure one in the paper illustrates the screen. This new technique allowed recessive screening in 95% of the Drosophila genome. It also greatly improved yields in germ line mutations.\n\nAnother published paper that employed the use of balancer chromosomes is \"Inhibition of RNA Interference and Modulation of Transposable Element Expression by Cell Death in Drosophila.\" This paper demonstrates the power of balancer chromosomes and what can be accomplished with genetically stable lines. A line was established that exhibited low levels of cell death and was named EGFPir hs-hid. The RNAi levels were analyzed and they found interesting results in the cells undergoing low levels of cell death and the surrounding cells in the tissue. They found that these cells would shut down their RNAi mechanism via maintaining RNA in a double stranded state. If RNA remains in a double stranded state then the RNAi mechanism of gene silencing is shut down.\n\nThe authors speculated that this response was an evolutionary trend toward redundant immune response against RNA viruses. If one cell is already undergoing cell death to attempt to stop spread of a virus, then the RNAi immune response has been ineffective. This causes another immune response that attempts to stop the virus which is binding double stranded RNA and keeping double stranded so that it cannot be transcribed into virus proteins. The mechanism of maintaining double stranded RNA is not known.\n", "id": "8485040", "title": "Balancer chromosome"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3127574", "text": "Outbreeding depression\n\nIn biology, outbreeding depression is when progeny resulting from crosses between genetically distant individuals (outcrossing) exhibit lower fitness in the parental environment than either of their parents or than progeny from crosses between individuals that are more closely related. The concept is opposed to inbreeding depression, although the two effects can occur simultaneously. Outbreeding depression manifests most significantly in two ways:\n\n\nThe different mechanisms of outbreeding depression can operate at the same time. However, determining which mechanism is more important in a particular population is very difficult. Generally the first mechanism will be more prevalent in the first generation (F1) after the initial outcrossing when most individuals are made up of the intermediate phenotype. An extreme case of this type of outbreeding depression is the sterility and other fitness-reducing effects often seen in interspecific hybrids (such as mules), which involves not only different alleles of the same gene but even different orthologous genes.\n\nThe second mechanism may not appear until two or more generations later (F2 or greater), when recombination has undermined vitality positive epistasis. Hybrid vigor in the first generation can, in some circumstances, be strong enough to mask the effects of outbreeding depression. An example of this is that plant breeders will make F1 hybrids from purebred strains, which will improve the uniformity and vigor of the offspring, however the F1 generation are not used for further breeding because of unpredictable phenotypes in their offspring. Unless there is strong selective pressure, outbreeding depression can increase in further generations as co-adapted gene complexes are broken apart without the forging of new co-adapted gene complexes to take their place.\n\nIf the outcrossing is limited and populations are large enough, selective pressure acting on each generation can restore fitness. Unless the F1 hybrid generation is sterile or very low fitness, selection will act in each generation using the increased diversity to adapt to the environment. This can lead to recovery in fitness to baseline, and sometimes even greater fitness than original parental types in that environment. However, as the hybrid population will likely to go through a decline in fitness for a few generations, they will need to persist long enough to allow selection to act before they can rebound \n\n", "id": "3127574", "title": "Outbreeding depression"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9500396", "text": "Mobilome\n\nThe mobilome is the total of all mobile genetic elements in a genome. The concept applies in various senses to the Eukaryota, to Prokaryota and to certain of the viruses. \n\nTransposable elements, elements that can move about or propagate \"within\" the genome, are the major constituents of the mobilome in eukaryotes.\n\nIn prokaryotes however, apart from transposable elements that may move within the genome, mobile genetic elements that can move \"between\" genomes other important components of the mobilome are extremely important in genetics and ecology. Examples include prophages and plasmids.\n\nIn viruses, some categories of mobile genetic elements have been identified. They are virophages that depend for their replication, on the presence of particular giant viruses in the eukaryotic cells that they infect. Such virophages are major elements in the mobilomes of some Megavirales.\n", "id": "9500396", "title": "Mobilome"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9654085", "text": "Phred quality score\n\nA Phred quality score is a measure of the quality of the identification of the nucleobases generated by automated DNA sequencing. It was originally developed for Phred base calling to help in the automation of DNA sequencing in the Human Genome Project. Phred quality scores are assigned to each nucleotide base call in automated sequencer traces. Phred quality scores have become widely accepted to characterize the quality of DNA sequences, and can be used to compare the efficacy of different sequencing methods. Perhaps the most important use of Phred quality scores is the automatic determination of accurate, quality-based consensus sequences.\n\nPhred quality scores formula_1 are defined as a property which is logarithmically related to the base-calling error probabilities formula_2.\n\nformula_3\n\nor\n\nformula_4\n\nFor example, if Phred assigns a quality score of 30 to a base, the chances that this base is called incorrectly are 1 in 1000.\n\nThe phred quality score is the negative ratio of the error probability to the reference level of formula_5 expressed in Decibel (dB).\n\nThe idea of sequence quality scores can be traced back to the original description of the SCF file format by Staden's group in 1992. In 1995, Bonfield and Staden proposed a method to use base-specific quality scores to improve the accuracy of consensus sequences in DNA sequencing projects.\n\nHowever, early attempts to develop base-specific quality scores had only limited success.\n\nThe first program to develop accurate and powerful base-specific quality scores was the program Phred. Phred was able to calculate highly accurate quality scores that were logarithmically linked to the error probabilities. Phred was quickly adopted by all the major genome sequencing centers as well as many other laboratories; the vast majority of the DNA sequences produced during the Human Genome Project were processed with Phred.\n\nAfter Phred quality scores became the required standard in DNA sequencing, other manufacturers of DNA sequencing instruments, including Li-Cor and ABI, developed similar quality scoring metrics for their base calling software.\n\nPhred's approach to base calling and calculating quality scores was outlined by Ewing \"et al.\". To determine quality scores, Phred first calculates several parameters related to peak shape and peak resolution at each base. Phred then uses these parameters to look up a corresponding quality score in huge lookup tables. These lookup tables were generated from sequence traces where the correct sequence was known, and are hard coded in Phred; different lookup tables are used for different sequencing chemistries and machines. An evaluation of the accuracy of Phred quality scores for a number of variations in sequencing chemistry and instrumentation showed that Phred quality scores are highly accurate.\n\nPhred was originally developed for \"slab gel\" sequencing machines like the ABI373. When originally developed, Phred had a lower base calling error rate than the manufacturer's base calling software, which also did not provide quality scores. However, Phred was only partially adapted to the capillary DNA sequencers that became popular later. In contrast, instrument manufacturers like ABI continued to adapt their base calling software changes in sequencing chemistry, and have included the ability to create Phred-like quality scores. Therefore, the need to use Phred for base calling of DNA sequencing traces has diminished, and using the manufacturer's current software versions can often give more accurate results.\n\nPhred quality scores are used for assessment of sequence quality, recognition and removal of low-quality sequence (end clipping), and determination of accurate consensus sequences.\n\nOriginally, Phred quality scores were primarily used by the sequence assembly program Phrap. Phrap was routinely used in some of the largest sequencing projects in the Human Genome Sequencing Project and is currently one of the most widely used DNA sequence assembly programs in the biotech industry. Phrap uses Phred quality scores to determine highly accurate consensus sequences and to estimate the quality of the consensus sequences. Phrap also uses Phred quality scores to estimate whether discrepancies between two overlapping sequences are more likely to arise from random errors, or from different copies of a repeated sequence.\n\nWithin the Human Genome Project, the most important use of Phred quality scores was for automatic determination of consensus sequences. Before Phred and Phrap, scientists had to carefully look at discrepancies between overlapping DNA fragments; often, this involved manual determination of the highest-quality sequence, and manual editing of any errors. Phrap's use of Phred quality scores effectively automated finding the highest-quality consensus sequence; in most cases, this completely circumvents the need for any manual editing. As a result, the estimated error rate in assemblies that were created automatically with Phred and Phrap is typically substantially lower than the error rate of manually edited sequence.\n\nIn 2009, many commonly used software packages make use of Phred quality scores, albeit to a different extent. Programs like Sequencher use quality scores for display, end clipping, and consensus determination; other programs like CodonCode Aligner also implement quality-based consensus methods.\n\nQuality scores are normally stored together with the nucleotide sequence in the widely accepted FASTQ format. They account for about half of the required disk space in the FASTQ format (before compression), and therefore the compression of the quality values can significantly reduce storage requirements and speed up analysis and transmission of sequencing data. Both lossless and lossy compression are recently being considered in the literature. For example, the algorithm QualComp performs lossy compression with a rate (number of bits per quality value) specified by the user. Based on rate-distortion theory results, it allocates the number of bits so as to minimize the MSE (mean squared error) between the original (uncompressed) and the reconstructed (after compression) quality values. Other algorithms for compression of quality values include SCALCE , Fastqz and more recently QVZ, AQUa and the MPEG-G standard, that is currently under development by the MPEG standardisation working group. Both are lossless compression algorithms that provide an optional controlled lossy transformation approach. For example, SCALCE reduces the alphabet size based on the observation that “neighboring” quality values are similar in general.\n\n", "id": "9654085", "title": "Phred quality score"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4064333", "text": "Transheterozygote\n\nThe term transheterozygote is used in modern genetics periodicals in two different ways. In the first, the transheterozygote has one mutant (-) and one wildtype allele (+) at each of two different genes (A-/A+ and B-/B+ where A and B are different genes). In the second, the transheterozygote carries two different mutated alleles of the same gene (A*/A', see example below). This second definition also applies to the term \"heteroallelic combination\".\n\nOrganisms with one mutant and one wildtype allele at one locus are called simply \"heterozygous\", not \"trans\"heterozygous.\n\nTransheterozygotes are useful in the study of genetic interactions and complementation testing.\n\nA transheterozygote is a diploid organism that is heterozygous at two different loci (genes). Each of the two loci has one natural (or wild type) allele and one allele that differs from the natural allele because of a mutation. Such an organism can be created by crossing together two organisms that carry one mutation each, in two different genes, and selecting for the presence of both mutations simultaneously in an individual offspring. The offspring will have one mutant allele and one wildtype allele at each of the two genes being studied.\n\nTransheterozygotes are useful in the study of genetic interactions. An example from Drosophila research: the wing vein phenotype of a recessive mutation in the Epidermal growth factor receptor (Egfr), a gene required for communication between cells, can be dominantly enhanced by a recessive mutation in Notch, another cell-signalling gene. A transheterozygote between Egfr and Notch has the genotype \"Notch/+ ; Egfr/+\" (where \"Notch\" and \"Egfr\" represent mutant alleles, and + represents wildtype alleles). The dominant interaction between Egfr and Notch suggested that the Egfr and Notch signalling pathways act together within the cell to affect the pattern of veins in the fly's wings.\n\nTransheterozygote refers to a diploid organism for which both alleles are different mutated versions of the normal (or wild type) allele. The presence of two different mutant alleles at the same locus are often referred to as a \"heteroallelic combination\".\n\nA transheterozygous (heteroallelic) organism can be created by first crossing together two mutants, each with a different mutation affecting the same locus, and screening for the presence of both alleles simultaneously in an individual offspring. A recent research paper using this definition reported cases of transvection between different alleles of Hsp90.\n\nThis second definition is also sometimes applied to the situation where two different chromosomal deletions exist in trans (on the different homologous chromosomes) and fail to complement because they disrupt one or more common genes. (For example, Df(E1)/Df(GN50) in Stowers, et al. 2000).\n\nBy way of example, transheterozygote (heteroallelic combination) can result from a cross between two organisms with genotypes AA* and AA', where A is the wild type allele of a given gene, and A* and A' are two different mutant alleles of that gene. As can be seen in the following Punnett square, approximately one fourth of the offspring of this cross will inherit both the A* and A' mutant alleles, resulting in a transheterozygote genotype of A*A'.\n\nTransheterozygotes are useful in complementation testing, as pioneered by geneticist Edward B. Lewis. If a transheterozygote inheriting two unknown recessive mutations continues to show the mutant phenotype, it can be concluded that both mutations must be in the same gene, because inheritance of just one recessive mutation in each of two different genes would result in an organism displaying the dominant wild type phenotype.\n\n", "id": "4064333", "title": "Transheterozygote"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9321944", "text": "Gametic phase\n\nIn a diploid individual, the gametic phase represents the original allelic combinations that an individual received from its parents. It is therefore a particular association of alleles at different loci on the same chromosome. Gametic phase is influenced by genetic linkage.\n", "id": "9321944", "title": "Gametic phase"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=610072", "text": "Nucleotide salvage\n\nA salvage pathway is a pathway in which nucleotides (purine and pyrimidine) are synthesized from intermediates in the degradative pathway for nucleotides.\n\nSalvage pathways are used to recover bases and nucleosides that are formed during degradation of RNA and DNA. This is important in some organs because some tissues cannot undergo de novo synthesis.\n\nThe salvaged bases and nucleosides can then be converted back into nucleotides.\n\nThe salvage pathway requires distinct substrates:\n\nUridine phosphorylase or pyrimidine-nucleoside phosphorylase adds ribose 1-phosphate to the free base uracil, forming uridine. Uridine kinase (aka uridine–cytidine kinase) can then phosphorylate this nucleoside into uridine monophosphate (UMP). UMP/CMP kinase () can phosphorylate UMP into uridine diphosphate, which nucleoside diphosphate kinase can phosphorylate into uridine triphosphate.\n\nThymidine phosphorylase or pyrimidine-nucleoside phosphorylase adds 2-deoxy-alpha-D-ribose 1-phosphate to thymine, forming thymidine. Thymidine kinase can then phosphorylate this compound into thymidine monophosphate (TMP). Thymidylate kinase can phosphorylate TMP into thymidine diphosphate, which nucleoside diphosphate kinase can phosphorylate into thymidine triphosphate.\n\nThe nucleosides cytidine and deoxycytidine can be salvaged along the uracil pathway by cytidine deaminase, which converts them to uridine and deoxyuridine, respectively. Alternatively, uridine–cytidine kinase can phosphorylate them into cytidine monophosphate (CMP) or deoxycytidine monophosphate (dCMP). UMP/CMP kinase can phosphorylate (d)CMP into cytidine diphosphate or deoxycytidine diphosphate, which nucleoside diphosphate kinase can phosphorylate into cytidine triphosphate or deoxycytidine triphosphate.\n\nPhosphoribosyltransferases add activated ribose-5-phosphate (Phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate, PRPP) to bases, creating nucleoside monophosphates. There are two types of phosphoribosyltransferases: adenine phosphoribosyltransferase (APRT) and hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (HGPRT). It is an important enzyme in Purine pathway metabolism. It is also involved in Lesch-Nyhan syndrome associated with a deficiency of HGPRT.\n", "id": "610072", "title": "Nucleotide salvage"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9089043", "text": "Scleraxis\n\nThe scleraxis protein is a member of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) superfamily of transcription factors. Currently two genes ( and respectively) have been identified to code for identical scleraxis proteins.\n\nIt is thought that early scleraxis-expressing progenitor cells lead to the eventual formation of tendon tissue and other muscle attachments. Scleraxis is involved in mesoderm formation and is expressed in the syndetome (a collection of embryonic tissue that develops into tendon and blood vessels) of developing somites (primitive segments or compartments of embryos). \n\nThe syndetome location within the somite is determined by FGF secreted from the center of the myotome (a collection of embryonic tissue that develops into skeletal muscle)- the FGF then induces the adjacent anterior and posterior sclerotome (a collection of embryonic tissue that develops into the axial skeleton) to adopt a tendon cell fate. This ultimately places future scleraxis-expressing cells between the two tissue types they will ultimately join. \n\nScleraxis expression will be seen throughout the entire sclerotome (rather than just the sclerotome directly anterior and posterior to the myotome) with an overexpression of FGF8, demonstrating that all sclerotome cells are capable of expressing scleraxis in response to FGF signaling. While the FGF interaction has been shown to be necessary for scleraxis expression, it is still unclear as to whether the FGF signaling pathway directly induces the syndetome to secrete scleraxis, or indirectly through a secondary signaling pathway. Most likely, the syndetomal cells, through careful reading of the FGF concentration (coming from the myotome), can precisely determine their location and begin expressing scleraxis. Much of embryonic development follows this model of inducing specific cell fates through the reading of surrounding signaling molecule concentration gradients. \n\nbHLH transcription factors have been shown to have a wide array of functions in developmental processes. More precisely, they have critical roles in the control of cellular differentiation, proliferation and regulation of oncogenesis. To date, 242 eukaryotic proteins belonging to the HLH superfamily have been reported. They have varied expression patterns in all eukaryotes from yeast to humans.\n\nStructurally, bHLH proteins are characterised by a “highly conserved domain containing a stretch of basic amino acids adjacent to two amphipathic α-helices separated by a loop”.\n\nThese helices have important functional properties, forming part of the DNA binding and transcription activating domains. With respect to scleraxis, the bHLH region spans amino acid residues 78 to 131. A proline rich region is also predicted to lie between residues 161-170. A stretch of basic residues, which aids in DNA binding, is found closer to the N terminal end of scleraxis.\n\nHLH proteins that lack this basic domain have been shown to negatively regulate the activities of bHLH proteins and are called inhibitors of differentiation (Id). Basic HLH proteins function normally as dimers and bind to a specific hexanucleotide DNA sequence (CAANTG) known as an E-box thus switching on the expression of various genes involved in cellular development and survival.\n", "id": "9089043", "title": "Scleraxis"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10502839", "text": "Polar mutation\n\nA polar mutation affects expression of downstream genes or operons. It can also affect the expression of the gene in which it occurs, if it occurs in a transcribed region. These mutations tend to occur early within the sequence of genes and can be nonsense, frameshift, or insertion mutations. Polar mutations are found only in organisms containing polycistronic mRNA.\n\n", "id": "10502839", "title": "Polar mutation"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2956658", "text": "Sherman paradox\n\nThe Sherman Paradox refers to an anomalous pattern of inheritance found in Fragile X syndrome. The phenomenon is also referred to as anticipation or dynamic mutation.\n\nThe paradox is named after Stephanie Sherman, who studied the inheritance patterns of people with Fragile X syndrome. Sherman observed that the effects of Fragile X syndrome seemed to occur more frequently with each passing generation. This observation is now known as the Sherman Paradox.\n\nThe paradox was ultimately explained by insights into the mutation process that gives rise to the syndrome. Sherman theorized that the gene responsible for Fragile X syndrome becomes mutated through a two-step process. The first mutation, called the 'premutation', doesn't cause any clinical symptoms. A second mutation was required to convert the 'premutation' into a 'full mutation' capable of causing the clinical symptoms associated with Fragile X syndrome. Additionally, premutations must pass through females in order to transform into the full mutation.\n\nThe Fragile X syndrome is so named because of the appearance of the X chromosome in individuals with Fragile X. Under an electron microscope, a region on the long arm of the chromosome resembles a thin string. Investigation showed that this region consists of a CGG repeat triplet in both normal and diseased individuals. The difference between normal and diseased is the length of the repeat; the repeat is longer where Fragile X syndrome is present. When the length of the repeat surpasses a critical threshold, symptoms of the disorder appear and they increase in likelihood and severity with further length. Even below this threshold there is a range where the repeat becomes unstable during meiosis.\n\nIn normal individuals, an insertion of extra CGGs is unlikely. However, as the length of the repeat increases, the probability of additional triplet insertions increases. When the expansion reaches the danger range, the carrier is still unaffected, but the risk of further mutation becomes significant. This is called the premutation range. Once the Fragile X syndrome emerges, symptoms worsen from generation to generation because of the self-promoting aspect of the mutation.\n\nA similar mechanism, involving triplet repeats, underlies myotonic dystrophy, spinocerebellar ataxia and Huntington's disease. In Huntington's disease, in contrast to Fragile X, somatic as well as germline mutations occur. Autopsies of affected individuals reveal an accumulation of long repeats of CAG in DNA in the striatum. In both conditions, effects are less severe if the long repeat is interspersed with other triplets.\n\n", "id": "2956658", "title": "Sherman paradox"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10453294", "text": "Mendelian randomization\n\nIn epidemiology, Mendelian randomization is a method of using measured variation in genes of known function to examine the causal effect of a modifiable exposure on disease in observational studies. The design was first proposed in 1986 and subsequently described by Gray and Wheatley as a method for obtaining unbiased estimates of the effects of a putative causal variable without conducting a traditional randomised trial. These authors also coined the term \"Mendelian randomization\". The design has a powerful control for reverse causation and confounding which otherwise bedevil epidemiological studies.\n\nAn important focus of observational epidemiology is the identification of modifiable causes of common diseases that are of public health interest. In order to have firm evidence that a recommended public health intervention will have the desired beneficial effect, the observed association between the particular risk factor and disease must imply that the risk factor actually causes the disease.\n\nWell-known successes include the identified causal links between smoking and lung cancer, and between blood pressure and stroke. However, there have also been notable failures when identified exposures were later shown by randomised controlled trials (RCTs) to be non-causal. For instance, it has now been shown that hormone replacement therapy will not prevent cardiovascular disease, as was previously thought, and may have other adverse health effects. The reason for such spurious findings in observational epidemiology is most likely to be confounding by social, behavioural or physiological factors which are difficult to control for and particularly difficult to measure accurately. Moreover, many findings cannot be replicated by RCTs for ethical reasons.\n\n\"Genetics is indeed in a peculiarly favoured condition in that Providence has shielded the geneticist from many of the difficulties of a reliably controlled comparison. The different genotypes possible from the same mating have been beautifully randomised by the meiotic process. A more perfect control of conditions is scarcely possible, than that of different genotypes appearing in the same litter.\" --R.A. Fisher\n\nMendelian randomization is a method that allows one to test for, or in certain cases to estimate, a causal effect from observational data in the presence of confounding factors. It uses common genetic polymorphisms with well-understood effects on exposure patterns (e.g., propensity to drink alcohol) or effects that mimic those produced by modifiable exposures (e.g., raised blood cholesterol). Importantly, the genotype must only affect the disease status indirectly via its effect on the exposure of interest. Because genotypes are assigned randomly when passed from parents to offspring during meiosis, if we assume that choice of mate is not associated with genotype (panmixia), then the population genotype distribution should be unrelated to the confounders that typically plague observational epidemiology studies. In this regard, Mendelian randomization can be thought of as a “natural” randomized controlled trial. Because the polymorphism is the instrument, Mendelian randomization is dependent on genetic association studies having provided good candidate genes for response to risk exposure.\n\nFrom a statistical perspective, MR is an application of the technique of instrumental variables with genotype acting as an instrument for the exposure of interest.\n\nMR is based on a number of assumptions. These include that there is no direct relationship between the instrument and the dependent variable, and that there are no direct paths between the instrument and any potential confounders. In addition to direct effects of the instrument on the disease misleading the analyst, misleading conclusions may also arise in the presence of linkage disequilibrium with unmeasured directly-causal variants, genetic heterogeneity, pleiotropy (often detected as a genetic correlation), or population stratification.\n\n\n", "id": "10453294", "title": "Mendelian randomization"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4567287", "text": "Maudsley Bipolar Twin Study\n\nThe Maudsley Bipolar Twin Study is an ongoing twin study of bipolar disorder running at the Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London since 2003. The study is investigating possible differences between people with a diagnosis of bipolar disorder and people without the diagnosis. In particular it is investigating difference in cognition and brain structure/function.\n\nThe Maudsley Study of bipolar disorder investigates different aspects of thinking, such as memory and attention, in twins with and without bipolar disorder. The tasks participants complete involve defining words and solving different kinds of problems. With adequate numbers of twins participating in the study, the hope is to understand any differences between these two groups. The eventual aim is to increase understanding of this complex mood disorder and to enhance future therapies for it.\n\n\n", "id": "4567287", "title": "Maudsley Bipolar Twin Study"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11330015", "text": "Synthetic genomics\n\nSynthetic genomics is a nascent field of synthetic biology that uses aspects of genetic modification on pre-existing life forms, or artificial gene synthesis to create new DNA or entire lifeforms.\n\nSynthetic genomics is unlike genetic modification in the sense that it does not use naturally occurring genes in its life forms. It may make use of custom designed base pair series, though in a more expanded and presently unrealized sense synthetic genomics could utilize genetic codes that are not composed of the two base pairs of DNA that are currently used by life.\n\nThe development of synthetic genomics is related to certain recent technical abilities and technologies in the field of genetics. The ability to construct long base pair chains cheaply and accurately on a large scale has allowed researchers to perform experiments on genomes that do not exist in nature. Coupled with the developments in protein folding models and decreasing computational costs the field synthetic genomics is beginning to enter a productive stage of vitality.\n\nResearchers were able to create a synthetic organism for the first time in 2010. This breakthrough was undertaken by Synthetic Genomics, Inc., which continues to specialize in the research and commercialization of custom designed genomes. It was accomplished by synthesizing a 600 kbp genome (resembling that of \"Mycoplasma genitalium\", save the insertion of a few watermarks) via the Gibson Assembly method and Transformation Associated Recombination.\n\nSoon after the discovery of restriction endonucleases and ligases, the field of genetics began using these molecular tools to assemble artificial sequences from smaller fragments of synthetic or naturally-occurring DNA. The advantage in using the recombinatory approach as opposed to continual DNA synthesis stems from the inverse relationship that exists between synthetic DNA length and percent purity of that synthetic length. In other words, as you synthesize longer sequences, the number of error-containing clones increases due to the inherent error rates of current technologies. Although recombinant DNA technology is more commonly used in the construction of fusion proteins and plasmids, several techniques with larger capacities have emerged, allowing for the construction of entire genomes.\n\nPolymerase cycling assembly (PCA) uses a series of oligonucleotides (or oligos), approximately 40 to 60 nucleotides long, that altogether constitute both strands of the DNA being synthesized. These oligos are designed such that a single oligo from one strand contains a length of approximately 20 nucleotides at each end that is complementary to sequences of two different oligos on the opposite strand, thereby creating regions of overlap. The entire set is processed through cycles of: (a) hybridization at 60 °C; (b) elongation via Taq polymerase and a standard ligase; and (c) denaturation at 95 °C, forming progressively longer contiguous strands and ultimately resulting in the final genome. PCA was used to generate the first synthetic genome in history, that of the Phi X 174 virus.\n\nThe Gibson assembly method, designed by Daniel Gibson during his time at the J. Craig Venter Institute, requires a set of double-stranded DNA cassettes that constitute the entire genome being synthesized. Note that cassettes differ from contigs by definition, in that these sequences contain regions of homology to other cassettes for the purposes of recombination. In contrast to Polymerase Cycling Assembly, Gibson Assembly is a single-step, isothermal reaction with larger sequence-length capacity; ergo, it is used in place of Polymerase Cycling Assembly for genomes larger than 6 kb.\n\nA T5 exonuclease performs a chew-back reaction at the terminal segments, working in the 5' to 3' direction, thereby producing complimentary overhangs. The overhangs hybridize to each other, a Phusion DNA polymerase fills in any missing nucleotides and the nicks are sealed with a ligase. However, the genomes capable of being synthesized using this method alone is limited because as DNA cassettes increase in length, they require propagation in vitro in order to continue hybridizing; accordingly, Gibson assembly is often used in conjunction with transformation-associated recombination (see below) to synthesize genomes several hundred kilobases in size.\n\nThe goal of transformation-associated recombination (TAR) technology in synthetic genomics is to combine DNA contigs by means of homologous recombination performed by the yeast artificial chromosome (YAC). Of importance is the CEN element within the YAC vector, which corresponds to the yeast centromere. This sequence gives the vector the ability to behave in a chromosomal manner, thereby allowing it to perform homologous recombination.First, gap repair cloning is performed to generate regions of homology flanking the DNA contigs. Gap Repair Cloning is a particular form of the polymerase chain reaction in which specialized primers with extensions beyond the sequence of the DNA target are utilized. Then, the DNA cassettes are exposed to the YAC vector, which drives the process of homologous recombination, thereby connecting the DNA cassettes. Polymerase Cycling Assembly and TAR technology were used together to construct the 600 kb \"Mycoplasma genitalium\" genome in 2008, the first synthetic organism ever created. Similar steps were taken in synthesizing the larger \"Mycoplasma mycoides\" genome a few years later.\n\nAn unnatural base pair (UBP) is a designed subunit (or nucleobase) of DNA which is created in a laboratory and does not occur in nature. In 2012, a group of American scientists led by Floyd Romesberg, a chemical biologist at the Scripps Research Institute in San Diego, California, published that his team designed an unnatural base pair (UBP). The two new artificial nucleotides or \"Unnatural Base Pair\" (UBP) were named d5SICS and dNaM. More technically, these artificial nucleotides bearing hydrophobic nucleobases, feature two fused aromatic rings that form a (d5SICS–dNaM) complex or base pair in DNA. In 2014 the same team from the Scripps Research Institute reported that they synthesized a stretch of circular DNA known as a plasmid containing natural T-A and C-G base pairs along with the best-performing UBP Romesberg's laboratory had designed, and inserted it into cells of the common bacterium \"E. coli\" that successfully replicated the unnatural base pairs through multiple generations. This is the first known example of a living organism passing along an expanded genetic code to subsequent generations. This was in part achieved by the addition of a supportive algal gene that expresses a nucleotide triphosphate transporter which efficiently imports the triphosphates of both d5SICSTP and dNaMTP into \"E. coli\" bacteria. Then, the natural bacterial replication pathways use them to accurately replicate the plasmid containing d5SICS–dNaM.\n\nThe successful incorporation of a third base pair is a significant breakthrough toward the goal of greatly expanding the number of amino acids which can be encoded by DNA, from the existing 20 amino acids to a theoretically possible 172, thereby expanding the potential for living organisms to produce novel proteins. The artificial strings of DNA do not encode for anything yet, but scientists speculate they could be designed to manufacture new proteins which could have industrial or pharmaceutical uses.\n\n\n", "id": "11330015", "title": "Synthetic genomics"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9634941", "text": "Gene trapping\n\nGene trapping is a high-throughput approach that is used to introduce insertional mutations across the mammalian genome. It is performed with gene trap vectors whose principal element is a gene trapping cassette consisting of a promoterless reporter gene and/or selectable genetic marker flanked by an upstream 3’ splice site (splice acceptor; SA) and a downstream transcriptional termination sequence (polyadenylation sequence; polyA). When inserted into an intron of an expressed gene, the gene trap cassette is transcribed from the endogenous promoter of that gene in the form of a fusion transcript in which the exon(s) upstream of the insertion site is spliced in frame to the reporter/selectable marker gene. Since transcription is terminated prematurely at the inserted polyadenylation site, the processed fusion transcript encodes a truncated and nonfunctional version of the cellular protein and the reporter/selectable marker. Thus, gene traps simultaneously inactivate and report the expression of the trapped gene at the insertion site, and provide a DNA tag (gene trap sequence tag, GTST) for the rapid identification of the disrupted gene.\nAn international public consortium International Gene Trap Consortium is centralizing the data and cell lines can be requested from them.\n\n", "id": "9634941", "title": "Gene trapping"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2163614", "text": "Pseudoknot\n\nA pseudoknot is a nucleic acid secondary structure containing at least two stem-loop structures in which half of one stem is intercalated between the two halves of another stem. The pseudoknot was first recognized in the turnip yellow mosaic virus in 1982. Pseudoknots fold into knot-shaped three-dimensional conformations but are not true topological knots.\n\nThe structural configuration of pseudoknots does not lend itself well to bio-computational detection due to its context-sensitivity or “overlapping” nature. The base pairing in pseudoknots is not well nested; that is, base pairs occur that \"overlap\" one another in sequence position. This makes the presence of pseudoknots in RNA sequences more difficult to predict by the standard method of dynamic programming, which use a recursive scoring system to identify paired stems and consequently, most cannot detect non-nested base pairs. The newer method of stochastic context-free grammars suffers from the same problem. Thus, popular secondary structure prediction methods like Mfold and Pfold will not predict pseudoknot structures present in a query sequence; they will only identify the more stable of the two pseudoknot stems.\n\nIt is possible to identify a limited class of pseudoknots using dynamic programming, but these methods are not exhaustive and scale worse as a function of sequence length than non-pseudoknotted algorithms. The general problem of predicting lowest free energy structures with pseudoknots has been shown to be NP-complete.\n\nSeveral important biological processes rely on RNA molecules that form pseudoknots, which are often RNAs with extensive tertiary structure. For example, the pseudoknot region of RNase P is one of the most conserved elements in all of evolution. The telomerase RNA component contains a pseudoknot that is critical for activity, and several viruses use a pseudoknot structure to form a tRNA-like motif to infiltrate the host cell.\n\n\n", "id": "2163614", "title": "Pseudoknot"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12008564", "text": "Tre recombinase\n\nTre recombinase is an experimental enzyme that in lab tests has removed DNA inserted by HIV from infected cells. The enzyme was derived from Cre recombinase through selective mutation for the purposes of identifying HIV markers, which are not bounded by loxP sites and therefore disallow attempts at Cre-Lox recombination.\n\n", "id": "12008564", "title": "Tre recombinase"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11740293", "text": "Ecogenetics diseases\n\nEcogenetics is the branch of genetics that studies how (inherited or acquired) genetic factors influence human susceptibility to environmental health risks. It studies the genetic basis of environmental toxicity to develop methods for the detection, prevention and control of environmentally-related disease. Ecogenetics interacts with ecology, molecular genetics, toxicology, public health medicine, and environmental epidemiology.\n\nEcogenetic diseases: An intermediate bw monogenic and poly genic- because they are relatively rare (as monogenic) but have very strong environmental influence as polygenic.\n\n\n\n", "id": "11740293", "title": "Ecogenetics diseases"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12337146", "text": "Transmission (genetics)\n\nGenetic transmission is the transfer of genetic information from genes to another generation (from parent to offspring), almost synonymous with heredity, or from one location in a cell to another.\n\nIt should not be confused with chromosomal translocation, which is rearrangement of parts between non-homologous chromosomes.\n\nIt should also not be confused with horizontal gene transfer, a process in which an organism incorporates genetic material from another organism without being the offspring of that organism.\n", "id": "12337146", "title": "Transmission (genetics)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2652348", "text": "Imaging genetics\n\nImaging genetics refers to the use of anatomical or physiological imaging technologies as phenotypic assays to evaluate genetic variation. Scientists that first used the term imaging genetics were interested in how genes influence psychopathology and used functional neuroimaging to investigate genes that are expressed in the brain (neuroimaging genetics).\n\nImaging genetics uses research approaches in which genetic information and fMRI data in the same subjects are combined to define neuro-mechanisms linked to genetic variation. With the images and genetic information, it can be determined how individual differences in single nucleotide polymorphisms, or SNPs, lead to differences in brain wiring structure, and intellectual function. Imaging genetics allows the direct observation of the link between genes and brain activity in which the overall idea is that common variants in SNPs lead to common diseases. A neuroimaging phenotype is attractive because it is closer to the biology of genetic function than illnesses or cognitive phenotypes.\n\nBy combining the outputs of the polygenic and neuro-imaging within a linear model, it has been shown that genetic information provides additive value in the task of predicting Alzheimer's disease (AD). AD traditionally has been considered a disease marked by neuronal cell loss and widespread gray matter atrophy and the apolipoprotein E allele (APOE4) is a widely confirmed genetic risk factor for late-onset AD.\n\nAnother gene risk variant is associated with Alzheimer's, which is known as the CLU gene risk variant. The CLU gene risk variant showed a distinct profile of lower white matter integrity that may increase vulnerability to developing AD later in life. Each CLU-C allele was associated with lower FA in frontal, temporal, parietal, occipital, and subcortical white matter. Brain regions with lower FA included corticocortical pathways previously demonstrated to have lower FA in AD patients and APOE4 carriers. CLU-C related variability found here might create a local vulnerability important for disease onset. These effects are remarkable as they already exist early in life and are associated with a risk gene that is very prevalent (~36% of Caucasians carry two copies of the risk conferring genetic variant CLU-C.) \nQuantitative mapping of structural brain differences in those at genetic risk of AD is crucial for evaluating treatment and prevention strategies. If the risk for AD is identified, appropriate changes in lifestyle may limit the apprehension of AD; exercise and body mass index-have an effect on brain structure and the level of brain atrophy \n\nIf suitable biomarkers are found and applied in clinical use, we will be able to give the diagnosis of the AD spectrum at an even earlier stage. In the proposal, the AD spectrum is divided into the three stages (i) the preclinical stage; (ii) mild cognitive impairment; and (iii) clinical AD. In the preclinical stage, only changes in a specific biomarker are observed with neither cognitive impairment nor clinical signs of AD. The mild cognitive impairment stage may include those showing biomarker changes as well as mild cognitive decline but no clinical signs and symptoms of AD. AD is diagnosed in patients with biomarker changes and clinical signs and symptoms of AD. This concept will promote understanding of the continuous transition from preclinical stage to AD via mild cognitive impairment, in which biomarkers can be utilized to discriminate and clearly define each stage of the AD spectrum. The new criteria will promote earlier detection of the subjects who will develop AD in later life, and also to initiate intervention aiming for the prevention of AD.\n\nImaging genetics must develop methods that will allow relating the effects of a large number of genetic variants on equally multi-dimensional neuroimaging phenotypes. Additionally, the field of imaging epigenetics is emerging with particular relevance, for example, to the understanding of intergenerational transmission of trauma-related psychopathology and related disturbances of maternal care.\n\nMedication, hospitalization history, or associated behaviors ranging such as smoking can affect imaging.\n\n", "id": "2652348", "title": "Imaging genetics"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12054042", "text": "Megan and Morag\n\nMegan and Morag, two domestic sheep, were the first mammals to have been successfully cloned from differentiated cells. They are not to be confused with Dolly the Sheep which was the first animal to be successfully cloned from an adult somatic cell or Polly the sheep which was the first cloned and transgenic animal. Megan and Morag, like Dolly and Polly, were cloned at the Roslin Institute in Edinburgh, Scotland in 1995.\n\nThe team at the Roslin Institute were seeking a way to modify the genetic constitution of sheep and cattle more effectively than the hit and miss method that was the only method and had sort of aids available at the time – microinjection. In microinjection, DNA is injected into the pronucleii of fertilized oocytes. However, only a small proportion of the animals will integrate the injected DNA into their genome and in the rare cases that they do integrate this new genetic information, the pattern of expression of the injected piece of DNA's gene, due to the random integration, is very variable.\n\nThe team choose to combine two approaches – microinjection and embryonic stem cells. In order to achieve this they decided to try to transfer the nucleus from one cell to another and stimulate this new cell to grow and become an animal, a process known as nuclear transfer. The team at the Roslin Institute tried to make immortalized and undifferentiated embryonic stem cell lines in sheep, but failed. As a result, they decided to work with cultured blastocyst cells. The nuclear material of these blastocyst cells would be transferred into an unfertilized sheep egg cell, an oocyte where the nucleus had been removed. To optimize the chances of successful nuclear transfer, they put the cultured cells into a state of quiescence, which was a similar state to that of the unfertilized egg cell.\n\nNuclear transfer was done, using electrical stimuli both to fuse the cultured cell with the enucleated egg and to kick start embryonic development. From 244 nuclear transfers, 34 developed to a stage where they could be placed in the uteri of surrogate mothers. In the summer of 1995, five lambs were born, of which two – Megan and Morag – survived to become healthy fertile adults. These were the first mammals cloned from differentiated cells. They were born with the names 5LL2 and 5LL5 in June 1995.\n\nThe production of Megan and Morag demonstrated that viable sheep can be produced by nuclear transfer from cells which have been cultured in vitro. They signified the technical breakthrough that made Dolly the sheep possible. The birth of Megan and Morag, a year before Dolly, with their huge beneficial potential, made relatively few headlines. , Megan was still alive and was the oldest cloned animal at the time.\n", "id": "12054042", "title": "Megan and Morag"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12139197", "text": "Transfer DNA binary system\n\nA transfer DNA (T-DNA) binary system is a pair of plasmids consisting of a \nbinary plasmid and a helper plasmid. The two plasmids are used together (thus \"binary\") to produce genetically modified plants. They are artificial vectors that have both been created from the naturally occurring Ti plasmid found in \"Agrobacterium tumefaciens\". The binary vector is a \"shuttle vector\", so-called because it is able to replicate in multiple hosts (\"E. coli\" and \"Agrobacterium tumefaciens\").\n\nSystems in which T-DNA and vir genes are located on separate replicons are called T-DNA binary systems. T-DNA is located on the binary vector (the non-T-DNA region of this vector containing origin(s) of replication that could function both in \"E. coli\" and in \"Agrobacterium tumefaciens\", and antibiotic resistance genes used to select for the presence\nof the binary vector in bacteria, became known as vector backbone sequences). The replicon containing the vir genes became known as the vir helper. Strains harboring this replicon and a T-DNA are considered disarmed if they do not contain oncogenes that could be transferred to a plant.\n\nThere are several binary vector systems that differ mainly in the plasmid region that facilitates replication in \"Agrobacterium\". Commonly used binary vectors include:\n\n\nCommon Helper plasmids include \n\nThe T-DNA portion of the binary plasmid is flanked by left and right border sequences and consists of a transgene as well as a plant selectable marker (PSM). Outside of the T-DNA, the binary plasmid also contains a bacterial selectable marker (BSM) and an origin of replication (ori) for bacteria.\n\nThe helper plasmid contains the \"vir\" genes that originated from the Ti plasmid of Agrobacterium. These genes code for a series of proteins that cut the binary plasmid at the left and right border sequences, and facilitate transduction of the T-DNA to the host plant's cells. The helper plasmid also contains a BSM and an ori for bacteria.\n\nThe pBIN19 plasmid was developed in the 1980s and is one of the first and most widely used binary vector plasmids. The pGREEN plasmid, which was developed in 2000, is a newer version of the binary vector that allows for a choice of promoters, selectable markers and reporter genes. Another distinguishing feature of the pGREEN plasmid is its large reduction in size (from about 11,7kbp to 4,6kbp) from pBIN19, therefore increasing its transformation efficiency \n\nAlong with higher transformation efficiency, pGREEN has been engineered to ensure transformation integrity. Both pBIN19 and pGREEN usually use the same selectable marker \"nptII\", but pBIN19 has the selectable marker next to the right border, while pGREEN has it close to the left border. Due to a polarity difference in the left and right borders, the right border of the T-DNA enters the host plant first. If the selectable maker is near the right border (as is the case with pBIN19) and the transformation process is interrupted, the resulting plant may have expression of a selectable marker but contain no T-DNA giving a false positive. The pGREEN plasmid has the selecable marker entering the host last (due to its location next to the left border) so any expression of the marker will result in full transgene integration.\n\n", "id": "12139197", "title": "Transfer DNA binary system"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9007251", "text": "SNP genotyping\n\nSNP genotyping is the measurement of genetic variations of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) between members of a species. It is a form of genotyping, which is the measurement of more general genetic variation. SNPs are one of the most common types of genetic variation. A SNP is a single base pair mutation at a specific locus, usually consisting of two alleles (where the rare allele frequency is > 1%). SNPs are found to be involved in the etiology of many human diseases and are becoming of particular interest in pharmacogenetics. Because SNPs are conserved during evolution, they have been proposed as markers for use in quantitative trait loci (QTL) analysis and in association studies in place of microsatellites. The use of SNPs is being extended in the HapMap project, which aims to provide the minimal set of SNPs needed to genotype the human genome. SNPs can also provide a genetic fingerprint for use in identity testing. The increase of interest in SNPs has been reflected by the furious development of a diverse range of SNP genotyping methods.\n\nSeveral applications have been developed that interrogate SNPs by hybridizing complementary DNA probes to the SNP site. The challenge of this approach is reducing cross-hybridization between the allele-specific probes. This challenge is generally overcome by manipulating the hybridization stringency conditions.\n\nDynamic allele-specific hybridization (DASH) genotyping takes advantage of the differences in the melting temperature in DNA that results from the instability of mismatched base pairs. The process can be vastly automated and encompasses a few simple principles.\n\nIn the first step, a genomic segment is amplified and attached to a bead through a PCR reaction with a biotinylated primer. In the second step, the amplified product is attached to a streptavidin column and washed with NaOH to remove the unbiotinylated strand. An allele-specific oligonucleotide is then added in the presence of a molecule that fluoresces when bound to double-stranded DNA. The intensity is then measured as temperature is increased until the melting temperature (Tm) can be determined. A SNP will result in a lower than expected Tm.\n\nBecause DASH genotyping is measuring a quantifiable change in Tm, it is capable of measuring all types of mutations, not just SNPs. Other benefits of DASH include its ability to work with label free probes and its simple design and performance conditions.\n\nSNP detection through molecular beacons makes use of a specifically engineered single-stranded oligonucleotide probe. The oligonucleotide is designed such that there are complementary regions at each end and a probe sequence located in between. This design allows the probe to take on a hairpin, or stem-loop, structure in its natural, isolated state. Attached to one end of the probe is a fluorophore and to the other end a fluorescence quencher. Because of the stem-loop structure of the probe, the fluorophore is in close proximity to the quencher, thus preventing the molecule from emitting any fluorescence. The molecule is also engineered such that only the probe sequence is complementary to the genomic DNA that will be used in the assay (Abravaya et al. 2003).\n\nIf the probe sequence of the molecular beacon encounters its target genomic DNA during the assay, it will anneal and hybridize. Because of the length of the probe sequence, the hairpin segment of the probe will be denatured in favour of forming a longer, more stable probe-target hybrid. This conformational change permits the fluorophore and quencher to be free of their tight proximity due to the hairpin association, allowing the molecule to fluoresce.\n\nIf on the other hand, the probe sequence encounters a target sequence with as little as one non-complementary nucleotide, the molecular beacon will preferentially stay in its natural hairpin state and no fluorescence will be observed, as the fluorophore remains quenched. \n\nThe unique design of these molecular beacons allows for a simple diagnostic assay to identify SNPs at a given location. If a molecular beacon is designed to match a wild-type allele and another to match a mutant of the allele, the two can be used to identify the genotype of an individual. If only the first probe’s fluorophore wavelength is detected during the assay then the individual is homozygous to the wild type. If only the second probe’s wavelength is detected then the individual is homozygous to the mutant allele. Finally, if both wavelengths are detected, then both molecular beacons must be hybridizing to their complements and thus the individual must contain both alleles and be heterozygous.\n\nIn high-density oligonucleotide SNP arrays, hundreds of thousands of probes are arrayed on a small chip, allowing for many SNPs to be interrogated simultaneously. Because SNP alleles only differ in one nucleotide and because it is difficult to achieve optimal hybridization conditions for all probes on the array, the target DNA has the potential to hybridize to mismatched probes. This is addressed somewhat by using several redundant probes to interrogate each SNP. Probes are designed to have the SNP site in several different locations as well as containing mismatches to the SNP allele. By comparing the differential amount of hybridization of the target DNA to each of these redundant probes, it is possible to determine specific homozygous and heterozygous alleles. Although oligonucleotide microarrays have a comparatively lower specificity and sensitivity, the scale of SNPs that can be interrogated is a major benefit. The Affymetrix Human SNP 5.0 GeneChip performs a genome-wide assay that can genotype over 500,000 human SNPs (Affymetrix 2007).\n\nA broad range of enzymes including DNA ligase, DNA polymerase and nucleases have been employed to generate high-fidelity SNP genotyping methods.\n\nRestriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) is considered to be the simplest and earliest method to detect SNPs. SNP-RFLP makes use of the many different restriction endonucleases and their high affinity to unique and specific restriction sites. By performing a digestion on a genomic sample and determining fragment lengths through a gel assay it is possible to ascertain whether or not the enzymes cut the expected restriction sites. A failure to cut the genomic sample results in an identifiably larger than expected fragment implying that there is a mutation at the point of the restriction site which is rendering it protection from nuclease activity.\n\nUnfortunately, the combined factors of the high complexity of most eukaryotic genomes, the requirement for specific endonucleases, the fact that the exact mutation cannot necessarily be resolved in a single experiment, and the slow nature of gel assays make RFLP a poor choice for high throughput analysis.\n\nTetra-primer amplification refractory mutation system PCR, or ARMS-PCR, employs two pairs of primers to amplify two alleles in one PCR reaction. The primers are designed such that the two primer pairs overlap at a SNP location but each match perfectly to only one of the possible SNPs. The basis of the invention is that unexpectedly, oligonucleotides with a mismatched 3'-residue will not function as primers in the PCR under appropriate conditions. As a result, if a given allele is present in the PCR reaction, the primer pair specific to that allele will produce product but not to the alternative allele with a different SNP. The two primer pairs are also designed such that their PCR products are of a significantly different length allowing for easily distinguishable bands by gel electrophoresis or melt temperature analysis. In examining the results, if a genomic sample is homozygous, then the PCR products that result will be from the primer that matches the SNP location and the outer opposite-strand primer, as well from the two outer primers. If the genomic sample is heterozygous, then products will result from the primer of each allele and their respective outer primer counterparts as well as the outer primers.\n\nAn alternative strategy is to run multiple qPCR reactions with different primer sets that target each allele separately. Well-designed primers will amplify their target SNP at a much earlier cycle than the other SNPs. This allows more than two alleles to be distinguished, although an individual qPCR reaction is required for each SNP. To achieve high enough specificity, the primer sequence may require placement of an artificial mismatch near its 3'-end, which is an approach generally known as Taq-MAMA.\n\nFlap endonuclease (FEN) is an endonuclease that catalyzes structure-specific cleavage. This cleavage is highly sensitive to mismatches and can be used to interrogate SNPs with a high degree of specificity\n\nIn the basic Invader assay, a FEN called cleavase is combined with two specific oligonucleotide probes, that together with the target DNA, can form a tripartite structure recognized by cleavase. The first probe, called the Invader oligonucleotide is complementary to the 3’ end of the target DNA. The last base of the Invader oligonucleotide is a non-matching base that overlaps the SNP nucleotide in the target DNA. The second probe is an allele-specific probe which is complementary to the 5’ end of the target DNA, but also extends past the 3’ side of the SNP nucleotide. The allele-specific probe will contain a base complementary to the SNP nucleotide. If the target DNA contains the desired allele, the Invader and allele-specific probes will bind to the target DNA forming the tripartite structure. This structure is recognized by cleavase, which will cleave and release the 3’ end of the allele-specific probe. If the SNP nucleotide in the target DNA is not complementary allele-specific probe, the correct tripartite structure is not formed and no cleavage occurs. The Invader assay is usually coupled with fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) system to detect the cleavage event. In this setup, a quencher molecule is attached to the 3’ end and a fluorophore is attached to the 5’ end of the allele-specific probe. If cleavage occurs, the fluorophore will be separated from the quencher molecule generating a detectable signal.\n\nOnly minimal cleavage occurs with mismatched probes making the Invader assay highly specific. However, in its original format, only one SNP allele could be interrogated per reaction sample and it required a large amount of target DNA to generate a detectable signal in a reasonable time frame. Several developments have extended the original Invader assay. By carrying out secondary FEN cleavage reactions, the Serial Invasive Signal Amplification Reaction (SISAR) allows both SNP alleles to be interrogated in a single reaction. SISAR Invader assay also requires less target DNA, improving the sensitivity of the original Invader assay. The assay has also been adapted in several ways for use in a high-throughput format. In one platform, the allele-specific probes are anchored to microspheres. When cleavage by FEN generates a detectable fluorescent signal, the signal is measured using flow-cytometry. The sensitivity of flow-cytometry, eliminates the need for PCR amplification of the target DNA (Rao et al. 2003). These high-throughput platforms have not progressed beyond the proof-of-principle stage and so far the Invader system has not been used in any large scale SNP genotyping projects.\n\nPrimer extension is a two step process that first involves the hybridization of a probe to the bases immediately upstream of the SNP nucleotide followed by a ‘mini-sequencing’ reaction, in which DNA polymerase extends the hybridized primer by adding a base that is complementary to the SNP nucleotide. This incorporated base is detected and determines the SNP allele (Goelet et al. 1999; Syvanen 2001). Because primer extension is based on the highly accurate DNA polymerase enzyme, the method is generally very reliable. Primer extension is able to genotype most SNPs under very similar reaction conditions making it also highly flexible. The primer extension method is used in a number of assay formats. These formats use a wide range of detection techniques that include MALDI-TOF Mass spectrometry (see Sequenom) and ELISA-like methods.\n\nGenerally, there are two main approaches which use the incorporation of either fluorescently labeled dideoxynucleotides (ddNTP) or fluorescently labeled deoxynucleotides (dNTP). With ddNTPs, probes hybridize to the target DNA immediately upstream of SNP nucleotide, and a single, ddNTP complementary to the SNP allele is added to the 3’ end of the probe (the missing 3'-hydroxyl in didioxynucleotide prevents further nucleotides from being added). Each ddNTP is labeled with a different fluorescent signal allowing for the detection of all four alleles in the same reaction. With dNTPs, allele-specific probes have 3’ bases which are complementary to each of the SNP alleles being interrogated. If the target DNA contains an allele complementary to the probe's 3’ base, the target DNA will completely hybridize to the probe, allowing DNA polymerase to extend from the 3’ end of the probe. This is detected by the incorporation of the fluorescently labeled dNTPs onto the end of the probe. If the target DNA does not contain an allele complementary to the probe's 3’ base, the target DNA will produce a mismatch at the 3’ end of the probe and DNA polymerase will not be able to extend from the 3' end of the probe. The benefit of the second approach is that several labeled dNTPs may get incorporated into the growing strand, allowing for increased signal. However, DNA polymerase in some rare cases, can extend from mismatched 3’ probes giving a false positive result.\n\nA different approach is used by \"Sequenom\"'s iPLEX SNP genotyping method, which uses a MassARRAY mass spectrometer. Extension probes are designed in such a way that 40 different SNP assays can be amplified and analyzed in a PCR cocktail. The extension reaction uses ddNTPs as above, but the detection of the SNP allele is dependent on the actual mass of the extension product and not on a fluorescent molecule. This method is for low to medium high throughput, and is not intended for whole genome scanning.\n\nThe flexibility and specificity of primer extension make it amenable to high throughput analysis. Primer extension probes can be arrayed on slides allowing for many SNPs to be genotyped at once. Broadly referred to as arrayed primer extension (APEX), this technology has several benefits over methods based on differential hybridization of probes. Comparatively, APEX methods have greater discriminating power than methods using this differential hybridization, as it is often impossible to obtain the optimal hybridization conditions for the thousands of probes on DNA microarrays (usually this is addressed by having highly redundant probes). However, the same density of probes cannot be achieved in APEX methods, which translates into lower output per run.\n\nIllumina Incorporated's Infinium assay is an example of a whole-genome genotyping pipeline that is based on primer extension method. In the Infinium assay, over 100,000 SNPs can be genotyped. The assay uses hapten-labelled nucleotides in a primer extension reaction. The hapten label is recognized by anti-bodies, which in turn are coupled to a detectable signal (Gunderson et al. 2006).\n\nAPEX-2 is an arrayed primer extension genotyping method which is able to identify hundreds of SNPs or mutations in parallel using efficient homogeneous multiplex PCR (up to 640-plex) and four-color single-base extension on a microarray. The multiplex PCR requires two oligonucleotides per SNP/mutation generating amplicons that contain the tested base pair. The same oligonucleotides are used in the following step as immobilized single-base extension primers on a microarray (Krjutskov et al. 2008).\n\nTaq DNA polymerase’s 5’-nuclease activity is used in the TaqMan assay for SNP genotyping. The TaqMan assay is performed concurrently with a PCR reaction and the results can be read in real-time as the PCR reaction proceeds (McGuigan & Ralston 2002). The assay requires forward and reverse PCR primers that will amplify a region that includes the SNP polymorphic site. Allele discrimination is achieved using FRET combined with one or two allele-specific probes that hybridize to the SNP polymorphic site. The probes will have a fluorophore linked to their 5’ end and a quencher molecule linked to their 3’ end. While the probe is intact, the quencher will remain in close proximity to the fluorophore, eliminating the fluorophore’s signal. During the PCR amplification step, if the allele-specific probe is perfectly complementary to the SNP allele, it will bind to the target DNA strand and then get degraded by 5’-nuclease activity of the Taq polymerase as it extends the DNA from the PCR primers. The degradation of the probe results in the separation of the fluorophore from the quencher molecule, generating a detectable signal. If the allele-specific probe is not perfectly complementary, it will have lower melting temperature and not bind as efficiently. This prevents the nuclease from acting on the probe (McGuigan & Ralston 2002).\n\nSince the TaqMan assay is based on PCR, it is relatively simple to implement. The TaqMan assay can be multiplexed by combining the detection of up to seven SNPs in one reaction. However, since each SNP requires a distinct probe, the TaqMan assay is limited by the how close the SNPs can be situated. The scale of the assay can be drastically increased by performing many simultaneous reactions in microtitre plates. Generally, TaqMan is limited to applications that involve interrogating a small number of SNPs since optimal probes and reaction conditions must be designed for each SNP (Syvanen 2001).\n\nDNA ligase catalyzes the ligation of the 3' end of a DNA fragment to the 5' end of a directly adjacent DNA fragment. This mechanism can be used to interrogate a SNP by hybridizing two probes directly over the SNP polymorphic site, whereby ligation can occur if the probes are identical to the target DNA. In the oligonucleotide ligase assay, two probes are designed; an allele-specific probe which hybridizes to the target DNA so that its 3' base is situated directly over the SNP nucleotide and a second probe that hybridizes the template upstream (downstream in the complementary strand) of the SNP polymorphic site providing a 5' end for the ligation reaction. If the allele-specific probe matches the target DNA, it will fully hybridize to the target DNA and ligation can occur. Ligation does not generally occur in the presence of a mismatched 3' base. Ligated or unligated products can be detected by gel electrophoresis, MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry or by capillary electrophoresis for large-scale applications. With appropriate sequences and tags on the oligonucleotides, high-throughput sequence data can be generated from the ligated products and genotypes determined (Curry et al., 2012). The use of large numbers of sample indexes allows high-throughput sequence data on hundreds of SNPs in thousands of samples to be generated in a small portion of a high-throughput sequencing run. This is a massive genotyping by sequencing technology (MGST).\n\nThe characteristic DNA properties of melting temperature and single stranded conformation have been used in several applications to distinguish SNP alleles. These methods very often achieve high specificity but require highly optimized conditions to obtain the best possible results.\n\nSingle-stranded DNA (ssDNA) folds into a tertiary structure. The conformation is sequence dependent and most single base pair mutations will alter the shape of the structure. When applied to a gel, the tertiary shape will determine the mobility of the ssDNA, providing a mechanism to differentiate between SNP alleles. This method first involves PCR amplification of the target DNA. The double-stranded PCR products are denatured using heat and formaldehyde to produce ssDNA. The ssDNA is applied to a non-denaturing electrophoresis gel and allowed to fold into a tertiary structure. Differences in DNA sequence will alter the tertiary conformation and be detected as a difference in the ssDNA strand mobility (Costabile et al. 2006). This method is widely used because it is technically simple, relatively inexpensive and uses commonly available equipment. However compared to other SNP genotyping methods, the sensitivity of this assay is lower. It has been found that the ssDNA conformation is highly dependent on temperature and it is not generally apparent what the ideal temperature is. Very often the assay will be carried out using several different temperatures. There is also a restriction on the length of fragment because the sensitivity drops when sequences longer than 400 bp are used (Costabile et al. 2006).\n\nThe temperature gradient gel electrophoresis (TGGE) or temperature gradient capillary electrophoresis (TGCE) method is based on the principle that partially denatured DNA is more restricted and travels slower in a porous material such as a gel. This property allows for the separation of DNA by melting temperature. To adapt these methods for SNP detection, two fragments are used; the target DNA which contain the SNP polymorphic site being interrogated and an allele-specific DNA sequence, referred to as the normal DNA fragment. The normal fragment is identical to the target DNA except potentially at the SNP polymorphic site, which is unknown in the target DNA. The fragments are denatured and then reannealed. If the target DNA has the same allele as the normal fragment, homoduplexes will form that will have the same melting temperature. When run on the gel with a temperature gradient, only one band will appear. If the target DNA has a distinct allele, four products will form following the reannealing step; homoduplexes consisting of target DNA, homoduplexes consisting of normal DNA and two heterduplexes of each strand of target DNA hybridized with the normal DNA strand. These four products will have distinct melting temperatures and will appear as four bands in the denaturing gel.\n\nDenaturing high performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) uses reversed-phase HPLC to interrogate SNPs. The key to DHPLC is the solid phase which has differential affinity for single and double-stranded DNA. In DHPLC, DNA fragments are denatured by heating and then allowed to reanneal. The melting temperature of the reannealed DNA fragments determines the length of time they are retained in the column. Using PCR, two fragments are generated; target DNA containing the SNP polymorphic site and an allele-specific DNA sequence, referred to as the normal DNA fragment. This normal fragment is identical to the target DNA except potentially at the SNP polymorphic site, which is unknown in the target DNA. The fragments are denatured and then allowed to gradually reanneal. The reannaled products are added to the DHPLC column. If the SNP allele in the target DNA matches the normal DNA fragment, only identical homoduplexes will form during the reannealing step. If the target DNA contains a different SNP allele than the normal DNA fragment, heteroduplexes of the target DNA and normal DNA containing a mismatched polymorphic site will form in addition to homoduplexes. The mismatched heteroduplexes will have a different melting temperature than the homoduplexes and will not be retained in the column as long. This generates a chromatograph pattern that is distinctive from the pattern that would be generated if the target DNA fragment and normal DNA fragments were identical. The eluted DNA is detected by UV absorption.\n\nDHPLC is easily automated as no labeling or purification of the DNA fragments is needed. The method is also relatively fast and has a high specificity. One major drawback of DHPLC is that the column temperature must be optimized for each target in order to achieve the right degree of denaturation.\n\nHigh Resolution Melting analysis is the simplest PCR-based method to understand. Basically, the same thermodynamic properties that allowed for the gel techniques to work apply here, and in real-time. A fluorimeter monitors the post-PCR denaturation of the entire dsDNA amplicon. You make primers specific to the site you want to amplify. You \"paint\" the amplicon with a double-strand specific dye, included in the PCR mix. The ds-specific dye integrates itself into the PCR product. In essence, the entire amplicon becomes a probe. This opens up new possibilities for discovery. Either you position the primers very close to either side of the SNP in question (small amplicon genotyping, Liew, 2004) or amplify a larger region (100-400bp in length) for scanning purposes. For simple genotyping of an SNP, it is easier to just make the amplicon small to minimize the chances you mistake one SNP for another. The melting temperature (Tm) of the entire amplicon is determined and most homozygotes are sufficiently different (in the better instruments) in Tm to genotype. Heterozygotes are even easier to differentiate because they have heteroduplexes generated (refer to the gel-based explanations) which broadens the melt transition and usually gives two discernible peaks. Amplicon melting using a fluorescently-labeled primer has been described (Gundry et al., 2003) but is less practical than using ds-specific dyes due to the cost of the fluorogenic primer.\n\nScanning of larger amplicons is based on the same principles as outlined above. However, melting temperature and the overall shape of the melting curve become informative. For amplicons >c.150bp there are often >2 melting peaks, each of which can vary, depending on the DNA template composition. Numerous investigators have been able to successfully eliminate the majority of their sequencing through melt-based scanning, allowing accurate locus-based genotyping of large numbers of individuals. Many investigators have found scanning for mutations using high resolution melting as a viable and practical way to study entire genes.\n\nDNA mismatch-binding proteins can distinguish single nucleotide mismatches and thus facilitate differential analysis of SNPs. For example, MutS protein from \"Thermus aquaticus\" binds different single nucleotide mismatches with different affinities and can be used in capillary electrophoresis to differentiate all six sets of mismatches (Drabovich & Krylov 2006).\n\nSNPlex is a proprietary genotyping platform sold by Applied Biosystems.\n\nSurveyor nuclease is a mismatch endonuclease enzyme that recognizes all base substitutions and small insertions/deletions (indels), and cleaves the 3′ side of mismatched sites in both DNA strands.\n\nNext-generation sequencing technologies such as pyrosequencing sequence less than 250 bases in a read which limits their ability to sequence whole genomes. However, their ability to generate results in real-time and their potential to be massively scaled up makes them a viable option for sequencing small regions to perform SNP genotyping. Compared to other SNP genotyping methods, sequencing is in particular, suited to identifying multiple SNPs in a small region, such as the highly polymorphic Major Histocompatibility Complex region of the genome.\n\n\n", "id": "9007251", "title": "SNP genotyping"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8265662", "text": "MASS syndrome\n\nMASS syndrome is a medical disorder similar to Marfan syndrome.\nMASS stands for: Mitral valve prolapse, Aortic root diameter at upper limits of normal for body size, Stretch marks of the skin, and Skeletal conditions similar to Marfan syndrome. MASS Phenotype is a connective tissue disorder that is similar to Marfan syndrome. It is caused by a similar mutation in the gene called fibrillin-1 that tells the body how to make an important protein found in connective tissue. This mutation is an autosomal dominant mutation in the FBN1 gene that codes for the extracellular matrix protein fibrillin-1; defects in the fibrillin-1 protein cause malfunctioning microfibrils that result in improper stretching of ligaments, blood vessels, and skin.\n\nSomeone with MASS phenotype has a 50 percent chance of passing the gene along to each child.\n\nPeople with features of MASS Phenotype need to see a doctor who knows about connective tissue disorders for an accurate diagnosis; often this will be a medical geneticist. It is very important that people with MASS Phenotype get an early and correct diagnosis so they can get the right treatment. Treatment options for MASS phenotype are largely determined on a case-by-case basis and generally address the symptoms as opposed to the actual disorder; furthermore, due to the similarities between these two disorders, individuals with MASS phenotype follow the same treatment plans as those with Marfan syndrome.\n\nMASS stands for the Mitral valve, myopia, Aorta, Skin and Skeletal features of the disorder. MASS Phenotype affects different people in different ways.\n\nIn MASS Phenotype:\n\nMitral valve prolapse may be present. This is when the flaps of one of the heart’s valves (the mitral valve, which regulates blood flow on the left side of the heart) are “floppy” and don’t close tightly. Aortic root diameter may be at the upper limits of normal for body size, but unlike Marfan syndrome there is not progression to aneurysm or predisposition to dissection. Skin may show stretch marks unrelated to weight gain or loss (striae). Skeletal features, including curvature of the spine (scoliosis), chest wall deformities, and joint hypermobility, may be present. People with MASS Phenotype do not have lens dislocation but have myopia, also known as nearsightedness.\n\nMASS syndrome and Marfan syndrome are overlapping connective tissue disorders. Both can be caused by mutations in the gene encoding a protein called fibrillin. These conditions share many of the same signs and symptoms including long limbs and fingers, chest wall abnormalities (indented chest bone or protruding chest bone), flat feet, scoliosis, mitral valve prolapse, loose or hypextensible joints, highly arched roof of the mouth, and mild dilatation of the aortic root.\n\nIndividuals with MASS syndrome do not have progressive aortic enlargement or lens dislocation, while people with Marfan syndrome do. Skin involvement in MASS syndrome is typically limited to stretch marks (striae distensae). Also, the skeletal symptoms of MASS syndrome are generally mild.\n", "id": "8265662", "title": "MASS syndrome"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2927686", "text": "Emergenesis\n\nIn psychology, a trait (or phenotype) is called emergenic if it is the result of a specific combination of several interacting genes (rather than of a simple sum of several independent genes). Emergenic traits will not run in families, but identical twins will share them. Traits such as \"leadership\", \"genius\" or certain mental illnesses may be emergenic.\nAlthough one may expect epigenetics to play a significant role in the phenotypic manifestation of twins reared apart, the concordance displayed between them can be attributed to emergenesis.\n\n", "id": "2927686", "title": "Emergenesis"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=787748", "text": "Backcrossing\n\nBackcrossing is a crossing of a hybrid with one of its parents or an individual genetically similar to its parent, in order to achieve offspring with a genetic identity which is closer to that of the parent. It is used in horticulture, animal breeding and in production of gene knockout organisms.\n\nBackcrossed hybrids are sometimes described with acronym \"BC\", for example, an F1 hybrid crossed with one of its parents (or a genetically similar individual) can be termed a BC1 hybrid, and a further cross of the BC1 hybrid to the same parent (or a genetically similar individual) produces a BC2 hybrid.\n\n\n\nYork radiate groundsel (\"Senecio eboracensis\") is a naturally occurring hybrid species of Oxford ragwort (\"Senecio squalidus\") and common groundsel (\"Senecio vulgaris\"). It is thought to have arisen from a backcrossing of the F1 hybrid with \"S. vulgaris\".\n\nAgain, the pure tall (TT) and pure dwarf (tt) pea plants when crossed in the parental generation, they produce all heterozygote (Tt) tall pea plants in the first filial generation. The cross between first filial heterozygote tall (Tt) pea plant and pure tall (TT) or pure dwarf (tt) pea plant of the parental generation is also an example for the back-crossing between two plants. In this case, the filial generation formed after the back cross may have a phenotype ratio of 1:1 if the cross is made with recessive parent or else all offspring may be having phenotype of dominant trait if back cross is with parent having dominant trait. The former of these traits is also called a test cross.\n\nIn plants, \"inbred backcross lines\" (IBLs) refers to lines (i.e. populations) of plants derived from the repeated backcrossing of a line with artificially recombinant DNA with the wild type, operating some kind of selection that can be phenotypical or through a molecular marker (for the production of introgression lines).\n\nBackcrossing may be deliberately employed in animals to transfer a desirable trait in an animal of inferior genetic background to an animal of preferable genetic background. In gene knockout experiments in particular, where the knockout is performed on easily cultured stem cell lines, but is required in an animal with a different genetic background, the knockout animal is backcrossed against the animal of the required genetic background. As the figure shows, each time that the mouse with the desired trait (in this case the lack of a gene (i.e. a knockout), indicated by the presence of a positive selectable marker) is crossed with a mouse of a constant genetic background, the average percentage of the genetic material of the offspring that is derived from that constant background increases. The result, after sufficient reiterations, is an animal with the desired trait in the desired genetic background, with the percentage of genetic material from the original stem cells reduced to a minimum (in the order of 0.01%).\n\nDue to the nature of meiosis, in which chromosomes derived from each parent are randomly shuffled and assigned to each nascent gamete, the percentage of genetic material deriving from either cell-line will vary between offspring of a single crossing but will have an expected value. The genotype of each member of offspring may be assessed to choose not only an individual that carries the desired genetic trait, but also the minimum percentage of genetic material from the original stem cell line.\nA \"consomic strain\" is an inbred strain with one of its chromosomes replaced by the homologous chromosome of another inbred strain via a series of marker-assisted backcrosses.\n\n\n", "id": "787748", "title": "Backcrossing"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1200773", "text": "Midparent\n\nStudying quantitative traits in heritability studies may be complicated by sex differences observed for the trait. The midparent value is defined as the average of the trait value of father and mother. This value can be used in the study to analyze the data set without heeding sex effects.\n\nWell-known examples include studies of stature height which is given by:\n\nformula_1[1]\n\nThe coefficient 1.08 serves as a scaling factor. After the 1.08 scaling, the mean of the mother's height is the same as that of the father's, and the variance is closer to the father's. In this way, sex difference can be ignored.\n", "id": "1200773", "title": "Midparent"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6139435", "text": "Polar overdominance\n\nPolar overdominance is a unique form of inheritance originally described in livestock, with relevant examples in humans and mice being discovered shortly after. The term polar is used to describe this type of overdominance because the phenotype of the heterozygote is more prevalent than the other genotypes. This polarity is shown as differential phenotype is only present in one of the heterozygote configurations when the recessive allele is inherited in a parent of origin type fashion. Polar overdominance differs from regular overdominance (also known as heterozygote advantage) where both heterozygote genotypes display a phenotype that has increased fitness regardless of the parent of origin. Studying this type of inheritance could have practical applications in preventative medicine for humans as well as a variety of other agricultural applications.\n\nThe first described occurrence of polar overdominance in sheep was shown after finding that a mutant Callipyge allele must be inherited from the father to cause a condition called muscle hypertrophy. Muscle hypertrophy in the offspring is caused by an increase in the size and proportion of muscle muscle fibers, namely the fast-twitch muscle fibers. This increase is generally located in the hind quarters and torso. Muscle hypertrophy only manifests itself in the offspring approximately one month after birth. Polar overdominance shows evidence of an imprinted locus displayed as the difference between the expression of heterozygote phenotypes in a parent-of-origin type fashion. It was discovered that a single nucleotide polymorphism in the \"DLK1\"–\"DIO3\" imprinted gene cluster affects the gene expression of paternal allele-specific genes and several maternal allele-specific long noncoding RNA and microRNA. Ectopic expression of Delta-like 1 homologue (DLK1) and the gene 11/Retrotransposon-like 1 (PEG11/RTL1) which are Paternally expressed proteins in skeletal muscle are a hallmark of these mutant individuals.\n\nMore and more studies have identified QTL that show evidence of genomic imprinting in farm animals other than sheep. After polar overdominant inheritance was discovered to be the cause of muscular hypertrophy in sheep, the ortholog for the human DLK1 gene (DLK1-GTL2 intergenic region) was studied in Pigs to try to determine the effects of inheritance on ham weight. The original purpose of this study was to find the connection between genetics and ham weight to try to produce pigs that were abnormally large compared to the average. Before conducting this research, it was also hypothesized that the locus for ham weight was related to the ovine callipgye locus in sheep. After researching it was discovered that the two were regions were likely unrelated due to different forms of parental inheritance exhibited in both cases and a relatively large physical distance between the loci on the chromosome. Unlike the form of paternal polar overdominance that occurs in the ovine callipyge locus, the locus that controls ham weight operates in a maternal polar overdominant fashion.\n\nThe term polar is used to desciribe this type of inheritance because the phenotype of one heterzygote is expressed at a level higher than other genotypes for the same locus including those displaying either homozygous geneotype. This unique form of inheritance has largely been studied in non-human mammals since 1996 until it was first described in humans in 2008. In humans, the inheritance of the alleles for the DLK1 gene (imprinted in eutherian mammals) is linked a higher rate of obeseity in the F1 generation. The imprinted DLK1-GTL2 in sheep is homologous to the DLK1 gene in humans, and includes the callipyge locus. There has been evidence to show that by screening potential fathers for a mutation at the DLK1 locus one could potentially see if their child is at a higher risk for obesity. Individuals who inherit this mutant allele from their father are more likely to show signs of obesity because the DLK1 gene is key in adipogenesis, or more simply the formation of fat cells.\n\n\n", "id": "6139435", "title": "Polar overdominance"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11821770", "text": "Signature-tagged mutagenesis\n\nSignature-tagged mutagenesis (STM) is a genetic technique used to study gene function. Recent advances in genome sequencing have allowed us to catalogue a large variety of organisms' genomes, but the function of the genes they contain is still largely unknown. Using STM, the function of the product of a particular gene can be inferred by disabling it and observing the effect on the organism. The original and most common use of STM is to discover which genes in a pathogen are involved in virulence in its host, to aid the development of new medical therapies/drugs.\n\nThe gene in question is inactivated by insertional mutation; a transposon is used which inserts itself into the gene sequence. When that gene is transcribed and translated into a protein, the insertion of the transposon affects the protein structure and (in theory) prevents it from functioning. In STM, mutants are created by random transposon insertion and each transposon contains a different 'tag' sequence that uniquely identifies it. If an insertional mutant bacterium exhibits a phenotype of interest, such as susceptibility to an antibiotic it was previously resistant to, its genome can be sequenced and searched (using a computer) for any of the tags used in the experiment. When a tag is located, the gene that it disrupts is also thus located (it will reside somewhere between a start and stop codon which mark the boundaries of the gene).\n\nSTM can be used to discover which genes are critical to a pathogen's virulence by injecting a 'pool' of different random mutants into an animal model (e.g. a mouse infection model) and observing which of the mutants survive and proliferate in the host. Those mutant pathogens that \"don't\" survive in the host must have an inactivated gene, required for virulence. Hence, this is an example of a negative selection method.\n", "id": "11821770", "title": "Signature-tagged mutagenesis"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13714607", "text": "Analysis of molecular variance\n\nAnalysis of molecular variance (AMOVA), is a statistical model for the molecular variation in a single species, typically biological. The name and model are inspired by ANOVA. The method was developed by Laurent Excoffier, Peter Smouse and Joseph Quattro at Rutgers University in 1992.\n\nSince developing AMOVA, Excoffier has written a program for running such analyses. This program, which runs on Windows is called Arlequin, and is freely available on Excoffier's website. There is also an implementation by Sandrine Pavoine in R language in the ade4 package available on CRAN (Comprehensive R Archive Network). Another implementation is in Info-Gen, which also runs on Windows. The student version is free and fully functional. Native language of the application is Spanish but an English version is also available. \n\nAn additional free statistical package, GenAlEx, is geared toward teaching as well as research and allows for complex genetic analyses to be employed and compared within the commonly used Microsoft Excel interface. This software allows for calculation of analyses such as AMOVA, as well as comparisons with other types of closely related statistics including F-statistics and Shannon's index, and more.\n\n\n<br>\n", "id": "13714607", "title": "Analysis of molecular variance"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13974072", "text": "Gene-environment correlation\n\nGene-environment correlation (or genotype-environment correlation) is said to occur when exposure to environmental conditions depends on an individual's genotype.\n\nGene-environment correlations (or rGE) is correlation of two traits, e.g. height and weight, which would mean that when one changes, so does the other. Gene-environment correlations can arise by both causal and non-causal mechanisms. Of principal interest are those causal mechanisms which indicate genetic control over environmental exposure. Genetic variants influence environmental exposure indirectly via behavior. Three causal mechanisms giving rise to gene-environment correlations have been described.\n\nGene-environment correlation can also arise from non-causal mechanisms, including evolutionary processes and behavioral 'contamination' of the environmental measure. Evolutionary processes, such as genetic drift and natural selection, can cause allele frequencies to differ between populations. For example, exposure to malaria-bearing mosquitoes over many generations may have caused the higher allele frequency among certain ethnic groups for the sickle hemoglobin (HbS) allele, a recessive mutation that causes sickle-cell disease but confers resistance against malaria. In this way, HbS genotype has become associated with the malarial environment.\n\nTwin and adoption studies have provided much of the evidence for gene-environment correlations by demonstrating that putative environmental measures are heritable. For example, studies of adult twins have shown that desirable and undesirable life events are moderately heritable as are specific life events and life circumstances, including divorce, the propensity to marry, marital quality and social support. Studies in which researchers have measured child-specific aspects of the environment have also shown that putative environmental factors, such as parental discipline or warmth, are moderately heritable. Television viewing, peer group orientations and social attitudes have all been shown to be moderately heritable. There is also a growing literature on the genetic factors influencing behaviors that constitute a risk to health, such as the consumption of alcohol, tobacco and illegal drugs, and risk-taking behaviors. Like parental discipline, these health related behaviors are genetically influenced, but are thought to have environmentally mediated effects on disease. To the extent that researchers have attempted to determine why genes and environments are correlated, most evidence has pointed to the intervening effects of personality and behavioral characteristics.\n\nEnvironments are heritable because genotype influences the behaviours that evoke, select, and modify features of the environment. Thus, environments less amenable to behavioural modification tend to be less heritable. For example, negative life events that are beyond the control of the individual (e.g., the death of a loved one, losing one’s home in a natural disaster) have lower heritability than negative life events that may be dependent on an individual’s behaviour (e.g., getting a divorce, getting fired from a job). Similarly, personal life events (i.e., events that occur directly to an individual) are more highly heritable than network life events (i.e., events that occur to someone within an individual’s social network, thus affecting the individual indirectly).\n\nEvidence for the existence of gene-environment correlations has recently started to accrue from molecular genetic investigations. The Collaborative Studies on Genetics of Alcoholism (COGA) group has reported that a single-nucleotide polymorphism in intron 7 of the gamma-aminobutyric acid A a2 receptor (rs279871; GABRA2) was associated with alcohol dependence and marital status. Individuals who had the high-risk GABRA2 variant (i.e., the variant associated with alcohol dependence) were less likely to be married, in part because they were at higher risk for antisocial personality disorder and were less likely to be motivated by a desire to please others. There is also molecular evidence for passive gene-environment correlation. A recent study found that children were almost 2.5 times more likely to be diagnosed with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) if their mothers were divorced, separated, or never married. In this sample, however, mothers possessing the short allele of the dopamine receptor gene DRD2 were more likely to be divorced, separated, or never married. Moreover, their children were more likely to have ADHD. Therefore, part of the association between parental marital status and ADHD diagnosis among children in this sample is due to the confounding variable of maternal DRD2 genotype. Both of these studies also found evidence for gene-environment interaction.\n\nDoctors want to know whether exposure to environmental risk causes disease. The fact that environmental exposures are heritable means that the relationship between environmental exposure and disease may be confounded by genotype. That is, the relationship may be spurious (not causal), because the same genetic factors might be influencing both exposure to environmental risk and disease. In such cases, measures aimed at reducing environmental exposure will not reduce the risk for disease. On the other hand, heritabiltity of exposure to environmental conditions itself does not mean environmental factors are not responsible for disease and so exposure reduction would benefit individuals with genetic predisposition to risk behavior.\n\nFor example, a study of children born to twin sisters investigated whether the relationship between parental divorce and offspring alcohol and emotional problems was causal or confounded by parental genotype. The study found that the offspring of twin sisters who were discordant for divorce had equally high levels of emotional problems, suggesting that genetic factors which made twin siblings divorce-prone also increased their children’s risk for depression and anxiety. This finding suggests that preventing the parents’ divorce would have had little impact on offspring risk for emotional problems (although the findings for alcohol problems were consistent with a causal role for divorce).\n\n", "id": "13974072", "title": "Gene-environment correlation"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6883469", "text": "Random chimeragenesis on transient templates\n\nRandom chimeragenesis on transient templates (RACHITT) is a method to perform molecular mutagenesis at a high recombination rate. For example for increased rate and extent of biodesulfurization of diesel by modification of dibenzothiophene mono-oxygenase. DNA shuffling is a similar but less powerful method used in directed evolution experiments.\n", "id": "6883469", "title": "Random chimeragenesis on transient templates"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14051879", "text": "Minicircle\n\nMinicircles are small (~4kb) circular plasmid derivatives that have been freed from all prokaryotic vector parts. They have been applied as transgene carriers for the genetic modification of mammalian cells, with the advantage that, since they contain no bacterial DNA sequences, they are less likely to be perceived as foreign and destroyed. (Typical transgene delivery methods involve plasmids, which contain foreign DNA.) The smaller size of minicircles also extends their cloning capacity and facilitates their delivery into cells.\n\nTheir preparation usually follows a two-step procedure:\n\n\nThe purified minicircle can be transferred into the recipient cell by transfection or lipofection and into a differentiated tissue by, for instance, jet injection.\n\nConventional minicircles lack an origin of replication, so they do not replicate within the target cells and the encoded genes will disappear as the cell divides (which can be either an advantage or disadvantage depending on whether the application demands persistent or transient expression). A novel addition to the field are nonviral self-replicating minicircles, which owe this property to the presence of a S/MAR-Element. Self-replicating minicircles hold great promise for the systematic modification of stem cells and will significantly extend the potential of their plasmidal precursor forms (\"parental plasmids\"), the more as the principal feasibility of such an approach has amply been demonstrated for their plasmidal precursor forms.\n\n", "id": "14051879", "title": "Minicircle"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8960415", "text": "Exonic splicing enhancer\n\nIn molecular biology, an exonic splicing enhancer (ESE) is a DNA sequence motif consisting of 6 bases within an exon that directs, or enhances, accurate splicing of heterogeneous nuclear RNA (hnRNA) or pre-mRNA into messenger RNA (mRNA). \n\nThe central dogma of molecular biology states that all of the information that makes you unique is housed in the nucleus of every cell in your body in the form of DNA. The human DNA is a string of 3.2 billion base pairs. Short sequences of DNA are transcribed to RNA; then this RNA is translated to a protein. A gene located in the DNA will contain introns and exons. Part of the process of preparing the RNA includes splicing out the introns, sections of RNA that do not code for the protein. The presence of exonic splicing enhancers is essential for proper identification of splice sites by the cellular machinery.\n\nSR proteins bind to and promote exon splicing in regions with ESEs, while heterogeneous ribonucleoprotein particles (hnRNPs) bind to and block exon splicing in regions with exonic splicing silencers. Both types of proteins are involved in the assembly and proper functioning of spliceosomes.\n\nDuring RNA splicing, U2 small nuclear RNA auxiliary factor 1 (U2AF35) and U2AF2 (U2AF65) interact with the branch site and the 3' splice site of the intron to form the lariat. It is thought that SR proteins that bind to ESEs promote exon splicing by increasing interactions with U2AF35 and U2AF65.\n\nMutation of exonic splicing enhancer motifs is a significant contributor to genetic disorders and some cancers. Simple point mutations in ESEs can inhibit affinity for splicing factors and alter alternative splicing, leading to altered mRNA sequence and protein translation. A field of genetic research is dedicated to determining the location and significance of ESE motifs in vivo.\n\nComputational methods were used to identify 238 candidate ESEs. ESEs are clinically significant because synonymous point mutations previously thought to be silent mutations located in an ESEs can lead to exon skipping and the production of a non functioning protein.\n\nDisruption of an exon splicing enhancer in exon 3 of MLH1 gene is the cause of HNPCC (hereditary non polyposis colorectal cancer) in a Quebec family.\n\nThere is evidence that these 236 hexamers that signal splicing are evolutionarily conserved.\n\n\n", "id": "8960415", "title": "Exonic splicing enhancer"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14664948", "text": "Replication protein A\n\nReplication protein A (RPA) is the major protein that binds to single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) in eukaryotic cells. In vitro, RPA shows a much higher affinity for ssDNA than RNA or double-stranded DNA.\n\nDuring DNA replication, RPA prevents single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) from winding back on itself or from forming secondary structures. This keeps DNA unwound for the polymerase to replicate it. RPA also binds to ssDNA during the initial phase of homologous recombination, an important process in DNA repair and prophase I of meiosis.\n\nHypersensitivity to DNA damaging agents can be caused by mutations in the RPA gene. Like its role in DNA replication, this keeps ssDNA from binding to itself (self-complementizing) so that the resulting nucleoprotein filament can then be bound by Rad51 and its cofactors.\n\nRPA also binds to DNA during the nucleotide excision repair process. This binding stabilizes the repair complex during the repair process.\nA bacterial homolog is called single-strand binding protein (SSB).\n\nRPA is a heterotrimer, composed of the subunits RPA1 (70kDa subunit), RPA2 (32kDa subunit) and RPA3 (14kDa subunit). The three RPA subunits contain four OB-folds (oligonucleotide/oligosaccharide binding) that bind RPA to single-stranded DNA. RPA shares many features with the CST Complex heterotrimer, although RPA has a more uniform 1:1:1 stoichiometry.\n\n", "id": "14664948", "title": "Replication protein A"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13515972", "text": "Nic site\n\nThe \"nic\" site or nick region is found within the origin of transfer (\"oriT\") site and is a key in starting bacterial conjugation.[1]\n\nA single strand of DNA, called the T-strand, is cut at \"nic\" by an enzyme called relaxase. This single strand is eventually transferred to the recipient cell during the process of bacterial conjugation. Before this cleavage can occur, however, it is necessary for a group of proteins to attach to the \"oriT\" site. This group of proteins is called the relaxosome. It is thought that portions of the \"oriT\" site are bent in a way that creates interaction between the relaxosome proteins and the \"nic\" site.\n\nCleaving the T-strand involves relaxase cutting a phosphodiester bond at the nic site. Interestingly, the cleaved strand is left with a hydroxyl group at the 3' end, which may allow for the strand to form a circular plasmid after moving into the recipient cell.\n", "id": "13515972", "title": "Nic site"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13515245", "text": "Transformation efficiency\n\nTransformation efficiency is the efficiency by which cells can take up extracellular DNA and express genes encoded by it. This is based on the competence of the cells. It can be calculated by dividing the number of successful transformants by the amount of DNA used during a transformation procedure. Transformants are cells that have taken up DNA (foreign, artificial or modified) and which can express genes on the introduced DNA.\n\nTransformation efficiency should be determined under conditions of cell excess. The number of viable cells in a preparation for a transformation reaction may range from 2×10 to 10; most common methods of \"E. coli\" preparation yield around 10 viable cells per reaction. The standard plasmids used for determination of transformation efficiency in \"Escherichia coli\" are pBR322 or other similarly-sized or smaller vectors, such as the pUC series of vectors. Different vectors however may be used to determine their transformation efficiency. 10–100 pg of DNA may be used for transformation, more DNA may be necessary for low-efficiency transformation (generally saturation level is reached at over 10 ng).\n\nAfter transformation, 1% and 10% of the cells are plated separately, the cells may be diluted in media as necessary for ease of plating. Further dilution may be used for high efficiency transformation.\n\nTransformation efficiency can be measured in transformants or colony forming unit (cfu) per μg DNA used. A transformation efficiency of 1×10 cfu/μg for a small plasmid like pUC19 is roughly equivalent to 1 in 2000 molecules of the plasmid used being transformed. In \"E. coli\", the theoretical limit of transformation efficiency for most commonly used plasmids would be over 1×10 cfu/μg. In practice the best achievable result may be around 2–4×10 cfu/μg for a small plasmid like pUC19, and considerably lower for large plasmids.\n\nIndividual cells are capable of taking up many DNA molecules, but the presence of multiple plasmids does not significantly affect the occurrence of successful transformation events. A number of factors may affect the transformation efficiency:\n\nPlasmid size – A study done in \"E. coli\" found that transformation efficiency declines linearly with increasing plasmid size, i.e. larger plasmids transform less well than smaller plasmids.\n\nForms of DNA – Supercoiled plasmid have a slightly better transformation efficiency than relaxed plasmids – relaxed plasmids are transformed at around 75% efficiency of supercoiled ones. Linear and single-stranded DNA however have much lower transformation efficiency. Single-stranded DNAs are transformed at 10 lower efficiency than double-stranded ones.\n\nGenotype of cells – Cloning strains may contain mutations that improve the transformation efficiency of the cells. For example, \"E. coli\" K12 strains with the \"deoR\" mutation, originally found to confer an ability of cell to grow in minimum media using inosine as the sole carbon source, have 4-5 times the transformation efficiency of similar strains without. For linear DNA, which is poorly transformed in \"E. coli\", the \"recBC\" or \"recD\" mutation can significantly improve the efficiency of its transformation.\n\nGrowth of cells – \"E. coli\" cells are more susceptible to be made competent when it is growing rapidly, cells are therefore normally harvested in the early log phase of cell growth when preparing competent cells. The optimal optical density for harvesting cells normally lies around 0.4, although it may vary with different cell strains. A higher value of 0.94-0.95 has also been found to produce good yield of competent cells, but this can be impractical when cell growth is rapid.\n\nMethods of transformation – The method of preparation of competent cells, the length of time of heat shock, temperature of heat shock, incubation time after heat shock, growth medium used, and various additives, all can affect the transformation efficiency of the cells. The presence of contaminants as well as ligase in a ligation mixture can reduce the transformation efficiency in electroporation, and inactivation of ligase or chloroform extraction of DNA may be necessary for electroporation, alternatively only use a tenth of the ligation mixture to reduce the amount of contaminants. Normal preparation of competent cells can yield transformation efficiency ranging from 10 to 10 cfu/μg DNA. Protocols for chemical method however exist for making supercompetent cells that may yield a transformation efficiency of over 1 x 10. Electroporation method in general has better transformation efficiency than chemical methods with over 1 x 10 cfu/μg DNA possible, and it allows large plasmids of 200 kb in size to be transformed.\n\nDamage to DNA – Exposure of DNA to UV radiation in standard preparative agarose gel electrophoresis procedure for as little as 45 seconds can damage the DNA, and this can significantly reduce the transformation efficiency. Adding cytidine or guanosine to the electrophoresis buffer at 1 mM concentration however may protect the DNA from damage. A higher-wavelength UV radiation (365 nm) which cause less damage to DNA should be used if it is necessary work for work on the DNA on a UV transilluminator for an extended period of time. This longer wavelength UV produces weaker fluorescence with the ethidium bromide intercalated into the DNA, therefore if it is necessary to capture images of the DNA bands, a shorter wavelength (302 or 312 nm) UV radiations may be used. Such exposure however should be limited to a very short time if the DNA is to be recovered later for ligation and transformation.\n\n\n", "id": "13515245", "title": "Transformation efficiency"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3699383", "text": "X:A ratio\n\nThe X:A ratio is the ratio between the number of X chromosomes and the number of sets of autosomes in an organism. This ratio is used primarily for determining the sex of some species, such as drosophila flies and the C. elegans nematode. The first use of this ratio for sex determination is ascribed to Victor M. Nigon.\n\nGenerally, a 1:1 ratio results in a female and a 1:2 ratio results in a male. When calculating the ratio, Y chromosomes are ignored. For example, for a diploid drosophila that has XX, the ratio is 1:1 (2 Xs to 2 sets of autosomes, since it is a diploid). For a diploid drosophila that has XY, the ratio is 1:2 (1 X to 2 sets of autosomes, since it is diploid).\n\n\n", "id": "3699383", "title": "X:A ratio"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15141674", "text": "SNPlex\n\nSNPlex is a platform for SNP genotyping sold by Applied Biosystems (ABI). It is based on capillary electrophoresis, which allows the assay to be performed on ABI's popular 3730xl DNA analyzers. Currently, up to 48 SNPs can be genotyped in a single reaction.\n\n", "id": "15141674", "title": "SNPlex"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14637814", "text": "Polymerase stuttering\n\nPolymerase stuttering is the process by which a polymerase transcribes a nucleotide several times without progressing further on the mRNA chain. It is often used in addition of poly A tails or capping mRNA chains by less complex organisms such as viruses.\n\nA polymerase may undergo stuttering as a probability controlled event, hence it is not explicitly controlled by any mechanisms in the translation process. Generally, it is a result of many short repeated frameshifts on a slippery sequence of nucleotides on the mRNA strand. However, the frameshift is restricted to one (in some cases two) nucleotides with a pseudoknot or choke points on both sides of the sequence.\n\nA polymerase that exhibits this behavior is RNA-dependent RNA polymerase, present in many RNA viruses. Reverse transcriptase has also been observed to undergo this polymerase stuttering.\n", "id": "14637814", "title": "Polymerase stuttering"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14102851", "text": "Endophenotype\n\nEndophenotype is a genetic epidemiology term which is used to separate behavioral symptoms into more stable phenotypes with a clear genetic connection. The concept was coined by Bernard John and Kenneth R. Lewis in a 1966 paper attempting to explain the geographic distribution of grasshoppers. They claimed that the particular geographic distribution could not be explained by the obvious and external \"exophenotype\" of the grasshoppers, but instead must be explained by their microscopic and internal \"endophenotype\".\n\nThe next major use of the term was in psychiatric genetics, to bridge the gap between high-level symptom presentation and low-level genetic variability, such as single nucleotide polymorphisms. It is therefore more applicable to more heritable disorders, such as bipolar disorder and schizophrenia. Since then, the concept has expanded to many other fields, such as the study of ADHD, addiction, Alzheimer's disease, obesity and cystic fibrosis. Some other terms which have a similar meaning but do not stress the genetic connection as highly are \"intermediate phenotype\", \"biological marker\", \"subclinical trait\", \"vulnerability marker\", and \"cognitive marker\". The strength of an endophenotype is its ability to differentiate between potential diagnoses that present with similar symptoms.\n\nIn psychiatry research, the accepted criteria which a biomarker must fulfill to be called an endophenotype include: \n\nIn the case of schizophrenia, the overt symptom could be a psychosis, but the underlying phenotypes are, for example, a lack of sensory gating and a decline in working memory. Both of these traits have a clear genetic component and can thus be called endophenotypes. A strong candidate for schizophrenia endophenotype is prepulse inhibition, the ability to inhibit the reaction to startling stimuli.\n\nEndophenotypes are quantitative, trait-like deficits that are typically assessed by laboratory-based methods rather than by clinical observation.\n\nThe four primary criteria for an endophenotype are that it is present in probands with the disorder, that it is not state-related (that is, it does not occur only during clinical episodes) but instead is present early in the disease course and during periods of remission, that it is observed in unaffected family members at a higher rate than in the general population, and that it is heritable. \nSome distinct genes that could underlie certain endophenotypic traits in schizophrenia include:\n\nIn bipolar disorder, one commonly identified endophenotype is a deficit in face emotion labeling, which is found in both individuals with bipolar disorder and in individuals who are \"at risk\" (i.e., have a first degree relative with bipolar disorder). Using fMRI, this endophenotype has been linked to dysfunction in the dorsolateral and ventrolateral prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, striatum, and amygdala. A polymorphism in the \"CACNA1C\" gene coding for the voltage-dependent calcium channel Ca1.2 has been found to be associated with deficits in facial emotion recognition.\n\nThe endophenotype concept has also been used in suicide studies. Personality characteristics can be viewed as endophenotypes that may exert a diathesis effect on an individual's susceptibility to suicidal behavior. Although the exact identification of these endophenotypes is controversial, certain traits such as impulsivity and aggression are commonly cited risk factors.\nOne such genetic basis for one of these at-risk endophenotypes has been suggested in 2007 to be the gene coding for the serotonin receptor 5-HT, known to be relevant in aggressive behaviors.\n\n", "id": "14102851", "title": "Endophenotype"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2108774", "text": "Subcloning\n\nIn molecular biology, subcloning is a technique used to move a particular DNA sequence from a \"parent vector\" to a \"destination vector\".\nSubcloning is not to be confused with molecular cloning, a related technique.\n\nRestriction enzymes are used to excise the gene of interest (the \"insert\") from the parent. The insert is purified in order to isolate it from other DNA molecules. A common purification method is gel isolation. The number of copies of the gene is then amplified using polymerase chain reaction (PCR).\n\nSimultaneously, the same restriction enzymes are used to digest (cut) the destination. The idea behind using the same restriction enzymes is to create complementary sticky ends, which will facilitate ligation later on. A phosphatase, commonly calf-intestinal alkaline phosphatase (CIAP), is also added to prevent self-ligation of the destination vector. The digested destination vector is isolated/purified.\n\nThe insert and the destination vector are then mixed together with DNA ligase. A typical molar ratio of insert genes to destination vectors is 3:1; by increasing the insert concentration, self-ligation is further decreased. After letting the reaction mixture sit for a set amount of time at a specific temperature (dependent upon the size of the strands being ligated; for more information see DNA ligase), the insert should become successfully incorporated into the destination plasmid.\n\nThe plasmid is often transformed into a bacterium like \"E. coli\". Ideally when the bacterium divides the plasmid should also be replicated. In the best case scenario, each bacterial cell should have several copies of the plasmid. After a good number of bacterial colonies have grown, they can be miniprepped to harvest the plasmid DNA.\n\nIn order to ensure growth of only transformed bacteria (which carry the desired plasmids to be harvested), a marker gene is used in the destination vector for selection. Typical marker genes are for antibiotic resistance or nutrient biosynthesis. So, for example, the \"marker gene\" could be for resistance to the antibiotic ampicillin. If the bacteria that were supposed to pick up the desired plasmid had picked up the desired gene then they would also contain the \"marker gene\". Now the bacteria that picked up the plasmid would be able to grow in ampicillin whereas the bacteria that did not pick up the desired plasmid would still be vulnerable to destruction by the ampicillin. Therefore, successfully transformed bacteria would be \"selected.\"\n\nIn this example, a gene from mammalian gene library will be subcloned into a bacterial plasmid (destination platform). The bacterial plasmid is a piece of circular DNA which contains regulatory elements allowing for the bacteria to produce a gene product (gene expression) if it is placed in the correct place in the plasmid. The production site is flanked by two restriction enzyme cutting sites \"A\" and \"B\" with incompatible sticky ends.\n\nThe mammalian DNA does not come with these restriction sites, so they are built in by overlap extension PCR. The primers are designed to put the restriction sites carefully, so that the coding of the protein is in-frame, and a minimum of extra amino acids is implanted on either side of the protein.\n\nBoth the PCR product containing the mammalian gene with the new restriction sites and the destination plasmid are subjected to restriction digestion, and the digest products are purified by gel electrophoresis.\n\nThe digest products, now containing compatible sticky ends with each other (but incompatible sticky ends with themselves) are subjected to ligation, creating a new plasmid which contains the background elements of the original plasmid with a different insert.\n\nThe plasmid is transformed into bacteria and the identity of the insert is confirmed by DNA sequencing.\n\n", "id": "2108774", "title": "Subcloning"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8394305", "text": "Negative selection (natural selection)\n\nIn natural selection, negative selection or purifying selection is the selective removal of alleles that are deleterious. This can result in stabilizing selection through the purging of deleterious variations that arise.\n\nPurging of deleterious alleles can be achieved on the population genetics level, with as little as a single point mutation being the unit of selection. In such a case, carriers of the harmful point mutation have fewer offspring each generation, reducing the frequency of the mutation in the gene pool.\n\nIn the case of strong negative selection on a locus, the purging of deleterious variants will result in the occasional removal of linked variation, producing a decrease in the level of variation surrounding the locus under selection. The incidental purging of non-deleterious alleles due to such spatial proximity to deleterious alleles is called background selection. This effect increases with lower mutation rate but decreases with higher recombination rate.\n\n", "id": "8394305", "title": "Negative selection (natural selection)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6538017", "text": "Restriction map\n\nA restriction map is a map of known restriction sites within a sequence of DNA. Restriction mapping requires the use of restriction enzymes. In molecular biology, restriction maps are used as a reference to engineer plasmids or other relatively short pieces of DNA, and sometimes for longer genomic DNA. There are other ways of mapping features on DNA for longer length DNA molecules, such as mapping by transduction.\n\nOne approach in constructing a restriction map of a DNA molecule is to sequence the whole molecule and to run the sequence through a computer program that will find the recognition sites that are present for every restriction enzyme known.\n\nBefore sequencing was automated, it would have been prohibitively expensive to sequence an entire DNA strand. To find the relative positions of restriction sites on a plasmid, a technique involving single and double restriction digests is used. Based on the sizes of the resultant DNA fragments the positions of the sites can be inferred. Restriction mapping is a very useful technique when used for determining the orientation of an insert in a cloning vector, by mapping the position of an off-center restriction site in the insert.\n\nThe experimental procedure first requires an aliquot of purified plasmid DNA (see appendix) for each digest to be run. Digestion is then performed with each enzyme(s) chosen. The resulting samples are subsequently run on an electrophoresis gel, typically on agarose gel.\n\nThe first step following the completion of electrophoresis is to add up the sizes of the fragments in each lane. The sum of the individual fragments should equal the size of the original fragment, and each digest's fragments should also sum up to be the same size as each other. If fragment sizes do not properly add up, there are two likely problems. In one case, some of the smaller fragments may have run off the end of the gel. This frequently occurs if the gel is run too long. A second possible source of error is that the gel was not dense enough and therefore was unable to resolve fragments close in size. This leads to a lack of separation of fragments which were close in size. If all of the digests produce fragments that add up one may infer the position of the REN (restriction endonuclease) sites by placing them in spots on the original DNA fragment that would satisfy the fragment sizes produced by all three digests.\n\nSee also restriction enzymes for more detail about the enzymes exploited in this technique.\n\nFor example the most common application of restriction mapping is presented: Determining the orientation of a cloned insert. This method requires that restriction maps of the cloning vector and the insert are already available. \n\nIf you know of a restriction site placed towards one end of the insert you can determine the orientation by observing the size of the fragments in the gel. Often the orientation of inserts is important and this technique is used to screen for the correct orientation.\n\nIn this example the orientation of an insert cloned with EcoRI will be found.\n\nDigests\n\n\nResultant Fragments: approximate sizes\n\nHypothetical Multiple Cloning Site of Vector\n\n5'-----HindIII-EcoRI----3'\n\nDiscussion\n\nThe EcoRI digest excises the insert yielding fragments of 3 kb and 5 kb. These are the sizes of the insert and vector backbone respectively. This is expected since the size of both the insert and vector are known beforehand. The presence of the insert is confirmed.\n\nThere is a known HindIII site off-center in the 3 kb insert. It is 2 kb away from one end (end A), and 1 kb away from the other end (end B). The HindIII digest of your clone yields fragments of 2 kb and 6 kb. The 2 kb fragment is exclusively the insert sequence and the 6 kb fragment is 1 kb of insert sequence attached to 5 kb of vector sequence. This means that the insert was cloned in an A to B orientation as opposed to B to A which would yield fragments of 7 kb and 1kb.\n\nresultant map\n\nRapid Denaturation and Renaturation of a crude DNA preparation by alkaline lysis of the cells and subsequent neutralization\n\nIn this technique the cells are lysed in alkaline conditions. The DNA in the mixture is denatured (strands separated) by disrupting the hydrogen bonds between the two strands. The large genomic DNA is subject to tangling and staying denatured when the pH is lowered during the neutralization. In other words, the strands come back together in a disordered fashion, basepairing randomly. The circular supercoiled plasmids' strands will stay relatively closely aligned and will renature correctly. Therefore, the genomic DNA will form an insoluble aggregate and the supercoiled plasmids will be left in solution. This can be followed by phenol extraction to remove proteins and other molecules. Then the DNA can be subjected to ethanol precipitation to concentrate the sample.\n\n", "id": "6538017", "title": "Restriction map"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16829133", "text": "Snagger\n\nSnagger is a bioinformatics software program for selecting tag SNPs using pairwise \"r\" linkage disequilibrium. It is implemented as extension to the popular software, Haploview, and is freely available under the MIT License. Snagger distinguishes itself from existing single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) selection algorithms, including Tagger, by providing user options that allow for:\n\n\nHaploview with Snagger has been developed and is maintained at the Genomics Center at the University of Southern California.\n\n", "id": "16829133", "title": "Snagger"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17110072", "text": "Double-pair mating\n\nDouble-pair mating (DPM) is a mating (crossing) design used in plant breeding. Each individual is mated with two others.\n\nIn Fig. 1 a connected variant of DPM is shown. DPM is an efficient mating design in balanced breeding programmes, where equal contribution from each breeding population member is desired. With DPM the number of new families created is equal to the number of individuals mated. DPM allows to efficiently utilise positive assortative mating for more efficient use of the breeding population members for deployment to seed orchards. In comparison with single pair mating, DPM has the advantages that the genes from the individual are transmitted to next generation even if one of the crosses fails; that safer estimates of breeding values of the parents get possible (useful for seed orchards, where tested trees are preferred); and that genes from different ancestors have a better chance to combine.\n", "id": "17110072", "title": "Double-pair mating"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11512477", "text": "SplitsTree\n\nSplitsTree is a popular program for inferring phylogenetic trees or, more generally, phylogenetic networks from various types of data such as a sequence alignment, a distance matrix or a set of trees. SplitsTree implements published methods such as split decomposition neighbor-net, consensus networks, super networks methods or methods for computing hybridization or simple recombination networks.\n\n\n", "id": "11512477", "title": "SplitsTree"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17259629", "text": "Chiasma (genetics)\n\nIn genetics, a chiasma (pl. chiasmata) is the point of contact, the physical link, between two (non-sister) chromatids belonging to homologous chromosomes. At a given chiasma, an exchange of genetic material can occur between both chromatids, what is called a chromosomal crossover, but this is much more frequent during meiosis than mitosis. In meiosis, absence of a chiasma generally results in improper chromosomal segregation and aneuploidy.\n\nThe phenomenon of genetic chiasmata (\"chiasmatypie\") was discovered and described in 1909 by Frans Alfons Janssens, a Professor at the University of Leuven in Belgium.\n\nWhen each tetrad, which is composed of two pairs of sister chromatids, begins to split, the only points of contact are at the chiasmata. The chiasmata become visible during the diplotene stage of prophase I of meiosis, but the actual \"crossing-overs\" of genetic material are thought to occur during the previous pachytene stage. Sister chromatids also form chiasmata between each other (also known as a chi structure), but because their genetic material is identical, it does not cause any noticeable change in the resulting daughter cells.\n\nIn humans, there seems to be one chiasma per chromosome arm, and in mammals, the number of chromosome arms is a good predictor of the number of crossovers. Yet, in humans and possibly other species, evidence shows that the number of crossovers is regulated at the level of an entire chromosome and not an arm.\n\nThe grasshopper \"Melanoplus femurrubrum\" was exposed to an acute dose of X-rays during each individual stage of meiosis, and chiasma frequency was measured. Irradiation during the leptotene-zygotene stages of meiosis, that is, prior to the pachytene period in which crossover recombination occurs, was found to increase subsequent chiasma frequency. Similarly, in the grasshopper \"Chorthippus brunneus\", exposure to X-irradiation during the zygotene-early pachytene stages caused a significant increase in mean cell chiasma frequency. Chiasma frequency was scored at the later diplotene-diakinesis stages of meiosis. These results suggest that X-rays induce DNA damages, likely including double-strand breaks, and these damages are repaired by a crossover pathway leading to chiasma formation.\n\n\n", "id": "17259629", "title": "Chiasma (genetics)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1423056", "text": "Radiation reduced hybrid\n\nRadiation reduced hybrid is procedure in discovering the location of genetic markers relative to one another. The relative location of these markers can be combined into a physical map or a genetic map. The radiation hybrid technique begins as another way to amplify and purify DNA, the first step in any sequencing project; radiation is used to break the DNA into pieces and these pieces are incorporated into the hybrid cell; the hybrid can be grown in large quantities. One can then check for the presence of various genetic markers using PCR and linkage analysis to resolve the distance between the markers. That is, if two genetic markers are near each other, they are less likely to be separated by the DNA-breaking radiation. The technique is similar to traditional linkage analysis, where we depend on genetic recombination to calculate the distance between two genetic markers.\n\nThe procedure utilizes two cell lines, neither of which can survive in toxic media,\nbut contain genes that can resist the toxin when contained by the same cell. The cell line under study is irradiated, causing breaks in the DNA. These cells are fused with the other cell line, producing a hybrid. If the hybrid incorporates genes from both cells, it will be able to survive in the toxic media.\n\nThe cells that survive can be grown in large quantities, thus amplifying the DNA that was incorporated from the irradiated cell line. One can prepare a sample of DNA from the hybrid cell line and use PCR to amplify two specific genetic markers. By running the PCR products on a gel, one can determine if both markers are in the cell line. If both markers are usually in the hybrid, we can conclude that they are near each other.\n", "id": "1423056", "title": "Radiation reduced hybrid"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=867927", "text": "Integron\n\nIntegrons are genetic mechanisms that allow bacteria to adapt and evolve rapidly through the acquisition, stockpiling and differential expression of new genes. These genes are embedded in a specific genetic structure called gene cassette (a term that is lately changing to integron cassette) that generally carries one promoterless ORF together with a recombination site (\"attC\"). Integron cassettes are incorporated to the \"attI\" site of the integron platform by site-specific recombination reactions mediated by the integrase.\n\nIntegrons were initially discovered on conjugative plasmids through their role in antibiotic resistance. Indeed, these mobile integrons, as they are now known, can carry a variety of cassettes containing genes that are almost exclusively related to antibiotic resistance. Further studies have come to the conclusion that integrons are chromosomal elements, and that their mobilisation onto plasmids has been fostered by transposons and selected by the intensive use of antibiotics. The function of the majority of cassettes found in chromosomal integrons remains unknown.\n\nAn integron is minimally composed of:\n\nAdditionally, an integron will usually contain one or more gene cassettes that have been incorporated into it. The gene cassettes may encode genes for antibiotic resistance, although most genes in integrons are uncharacterized. An \"attC\" sequence (also called 59-be) is a repeat that flanks cassettes and enables cassettes to be integrated at the \"attI\" site, excised and undergo horizontal gene transfer.\n\nIntegrons may be found as part of mobile genetic elements such as plasmids and transposons. Integrons can also be found in chromosomes.\n\nThe term \"super-integron\" was first applied in 1998 (but without definition) to the integron with a long cassette array on the small chromosome of \"Vibrio cholerae\". The term has since been used for integrons of various cassette array lengths or for integrons on bacterial chromosomes (versus, for example, plasmids). Use of \"super-integron\" is now discouraged since its meaning is unclear.\n\n\n\n", "id": "867927", "title": "Integron"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15620079", "text": "Gene knockin\n\nIn molecular cloning and biology, a knock-in (or gene knock-in) refers to a genetic engineering method that involves the one-for-one substitution of DNA sequence information in a genetic locus or the insertion of sequence information not found within the locus. Typically, this is done in mice since the technology for this process is more refined and there is a high degree of shared sequence complexity between mice and humans. The difference between knock-in technology and traditional transgenic techniques is that a knock-in involves a gene inserted into a specific locus, and is thus a \"targeted\" insertion.\n\nA common use of knock-in technology is for the creation of disease models. It is a technique by which scientific investigators may study the function of the regulatory machinery (e.g. promoters) that governs the expression of the natural gene being replaced. This is accomplished by observing the new phenotype of the organism in question. The BACs and YACs are used in this case so that large fragments can be transferred.\n\nGene knockin originated as a slight modification of the original knockout technique developed by Martin Evans, Oliver Smithies, and Mario Capecchi. Traditionally, knockin techniques have relied on homologous recombination to drive targeted gene replacement, although other methods using a transposon-mediated system to insert the target gene have been developed. The use of \"loxP\" flanking sites that become excised upon expression of Cre recombinase with gene vectors is an example of this. Embryonic stem cells with the modification of interest are then implanted into a viable blastocyst, which will grow into a mature chimeric mouse with some cells having the original blastocyst cell genetic information and other cells having the modifications introduced to the embryonic stem cells. Subsequent offspring of the chimeric mouse will then have the gene knockin.\n\nGene knockin has allowed, for the first time, hypothesis-driven studies on gene modifications and resultant phenotypes. Mutations in the human p53 gene, for example, can be induced by exposure to benzo(a)pyrene and the mutated copy of the p53 gene can be inserted into mouse genomes. Lung tumors observed in the knockin mice offer support for the hypothesis of BaP’s carcinogenicity. More recent developments in knockin technique have allowed for pigs to have a gene for green fluorescent protein inserted with a CRISPR/Cas9 system, which allows for much more accurate and successful gene insertions. The speed of CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene knockin also allows for biallelic modifications to some genes to be generated and the phenotype in mice observed in a single generation, an unprecedented timeframe.\n\nKnockin technology is different from knockout technology in that knockout technology aims to either delete part of the DNA sequence or insert irrelevant DNA sequence information to disrupt the expression of a specific genetic locus. Gene knockin technology, on the other hand, alters the genetic locus of interest via a one-for-one substitution of DNA sequence information or by the addition of sequence information that is not found on said genetic locus. A gene knockin therefore can be seen as a gain of function mutation and a gene knockout a loss of function mutation, but a gene knockin may also involve the substitution of a functional gene locus for a mutant phenotype that results in some loss of function.\n\nBecause of the success of gene knockin methods thus far, many clinical applications can be envisioned. Knockin of sections of the human immunoglobulin gene into mice has already been shown to allow them to produce humanized antibodies that are therapeutically useful. It should be possible to modify stem cells in humans to restore targeted gene function in certain tissues, for example possibly correcting the mutant gamma-chain gene of the IL-2 receptor in hematopoietic stem cells to restore lymphocyte development in people with X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency.\n\nWhile gene knockin technology has proven to be a powerful technique for the generation of models of human disease and insight into proteins \"in vivo\", numerous limitations still exist. Many of these are shared with the limitations of knockout technology. First, combinations of knockin genes lead to growing complexity in the interactions that inserted genes and their products have with other sections of the genome and can therefore lead to more side effects and difficult-to-explain phenotypes. Also, only a few loci, such as the ROSA26 locus have been characterized well enough where they can be used for conditional gene knockins, making combinations of reporter and transgenes in the same locus problematic. The biggest disadvantage of using gene knockin for human disease model generation is that mouse physiology is not identical to that of humans and human orthologs of proteins expressed in mice will often not wholly reflect the role of a gene in human pathology. This can be seen in mice produced with the ΔF508 fibrosis mutation in the CFTR gene, which accounts for more than 70% of the mutations in this gene for the human population and leads to cystic fibrosis. While ΔF508 CF mice do exhibit the processing defects characteristic of the human mutation, they do not display the pulmonary pathophysiological changes seen in humans and carry virtually no lung phenotype. Such problems could be ameliorated by the use of a variety of animal models, and pig models (pig lungs share many biochemical and physiological similarities with human lungs) have been generated in an attempt to better explain the activity of the ΔF508 mutation.\n\n\n", "id": "15620079", "title": "Gene knockin"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3755776", "text": "PBluescript\n\nIn genetics, pBluescript (pBS) or pBluescript II is a commercially available phagemid containing several useful sequences for use in cloning with bacteriophage. The sequences include a multiple cloning site sequence (MCS), antibiotic resistance sequence to ampicillin and an \"E. coli\" and f1 helper phage origin of replication. The multiple cloning site sequence is located within a LacZ controlled gene designed to provide a blue coloration when expressed in bacteria. This is usually achieved via X-gal found in agarose growth media used to culture bacteria with pBS. If the gene is disrupted by successful insertion of a DNA sequence, the bacteria exhibit a white coloration in Blue white screening, distinguishing successful recombination from those phagemids which were not altered. These recombinant plasmids can then be used in a variety of molecular techniques. Determining expression and developing genomic libraries are some applications for which the pBS recombinants can be used.\n\nThe pBluescript II phagemids (plasmids with a phage origin) are cloning\nvectors designed to simplify commonly used cloning and sequencing\nprocedures, including the construction of nested deletions for DNA\nsequencing, generation of RNA transcripts in vitro and site-specific\nmutagenesis and gene mapping. The pBluescript II phagemids have an\nextensive multiple cloning site with 21 unique restriction enzyme recognition sites.\nFlanking the multiple cloning site are T7 and T3 RNA polymerase promoters that can\nbe used to synthesize RNA in vitro.\n\nThe choice of promoter used to initiate transcription determines which strand of the insert cloned into the\nmultiple cloning site will be transcribed. \nCircular maps and lists of features for the pBluescript II phagemids. The multiple cloning site and T7 and T3 RNA polymerase\npromoter sequences are present in the N-terminal portion of a lacZ gene\nfragment. A total of 131 amino acids of β-galactosidase coding sequence is\npresent in the pBluescript II phagemid, but the coding sequence is\ninterrupted by the large multiple cloning site. (There are 36 amino acids from the\ninitiator Met sequence to the EcoR I site.) pBluescript II phagemids having\nno inserts in the multiple cloning site will produce blue colonies in the appropriate\nstrains of bacteria (i.e., strains containing lacZΔM15 on an F´ episome, such\nas XL1-Blue MRF´, among others). pBluescript II phagemids that have\ninserts will produce white colonies using the same strain, because the inserts\ndisrupt the coding region of the lacZ gene fragment.\npBluescript II (+) and (–) are available with two multiple cloning site orientations\ndesignated as either KS or SK using the following convention: (1) in the KS\norientation, the Kpn I restriction site is nearest the lacZ promoter and the\nSac I restriction site is farthest from the lacZ promoter; and (2) in the SK\norientation, the Sac I site is the closest restriction site to the lacZ promoter\nand the Kpn I site is the farthest. \nFlanking the T3 and T7 promoters are BssH II sites. This rare six-base cutter\nwill allow the insert plus the T phage RNA promoters to be excised and\nused for gene mapping.\npBluescript II phagemids can be rescued as single-stranded (ss) DNA.\npBluescript II phagemids contain a 454-bp filamentous f1 phage intergenic\nregion (M13 related), which includes the 307-bp origin of replication. The\n(+) and (–) orientations of the f1 intergenic region allow the rescue of sense\nor antisense ssDNA by a helper phage. This ssDNA can be used for\ndideoxynucleotide sequencing (Sanger method) or site-specific mutagenesis.\n", "id": "3755776", "title": "PBluescript"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5844156", "text": "Genotropism\n\nGenotropism is defined as the reciprocal attraction between carriers of the same or related latent recessive genes. Developed by the Hungarian psychiatrist Léopold Szondi in the 1930s, the theory concludes that instinct is biological and genetic in origin. Szondi believed that these genes regulated the \"possibilities of fate\" and was the working principle of the familial unconscious.\n\nGenotropism consists of the theory that genes influence human behavior. While identified as entities, genes exist in groups because evolution favors cooperation. Within each gene group, it is possible to detect specific needs that function as mechanisms of screening and natural selection.\n\nSzondi arrived a sort of genetic determinism, a philosophical theory of predestination. \"The latent hereditary factors in human beings, the recessive genes, do not remain dormant or inactive within the human organism, but exert a very important and even decisive influence upon its behavior. This latent or recessive gene theory claims that these non-dominant hereditary factors determine the Object selection, voluntary and involuntary, of the individual. The drives resulting from these latent genes, therefore, direct the individual's selection of love objects, friendships, occupations, diseases, and forms of death. Hence, from the very beginning of the human's existence there is a hidden plan of life guided by 'Instinctual drives'.\"\n\nIn Szondi's theory, each \"need\" (a link between genes and behavior) comprises a polarity of positive and negative tendencies. Needs also group together in polarities to form larger wholes called \"instinctual drives.\" Together, behavior tendencies, needs, and drives combine to form patterned wholes.\n\nSzondi created a drive theory that determines that every drive has at least four genes. \"The four Szondian drives are (1) contact, (2) sexual, (3) paroxysmal, and (4) ego. They are implicated in their corresponding psychiatric disorders and equivalents: (1) manic-depression, (2) sexual abnormality, (3) epilepsy and hysteria, and (4) schizophrenia.\" By locating mental disorders in biological drives, one can illustrate that illness is a disharmony of basic needs.\n\nGenotropism is the working principle of the familial unconscious, the quantitative sharing of genes across the generations of family. Offspring may inherit several genes from both parents, while others receive fewer genes and exhibit spectrum conditions. (For example, while one child is diagnosed with epilepsy, the other only shows various symptoms over a period of time).\n\nSzondi observed that when families pass down genes for specific diseases, the same family transmits defenses against those disorders. Known to Szondi as heterosis, it is currently known as \"balancing selection.\"\n\nSzondi concluded that genetic traits confer needs and tendencies that shape decision making. \"Genetic tendencies can be decoded by constructing genealogies, indicating recurrent patterns of marriage, friendship, and vocational choices in relation to types of illness and modes of death. Destiny comprises all of the hereditary tendencies in the familial unconscious which are expressed primarily through marriage and vocational selections.\" Basically, the needs and tendencies in which humans exhibit will guide similar genes to one another.\n\nWhile Szondi accepted the Oedipus complex, he found that it existed only under the following conditions: when the mother sees her father or brother represented in her son, or when the father sees his mother or sister in his daughter. Therefore, the son takes after the genes represented in his maternal grandfather or uncles, and the daughter after her paternal grandmother or aunt.\n\nAlthough it was mostly abandoned by psychologists in the years after Szondi's death, recent discoveries in evolutionary psychology might be bringing it back in a revised form, through the study of homogamy and psychopathology.\n\n", "id": "5844156", "title": "Genotropism"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14766209", "text": "MECOM\n\nMDS1 and EVI1 complex locus protein EVI1 (MECOM) also known as ecotropic virus integration site 1 protein homolog (EVI-1) or positive regulatory domain zinc finger protein 3 (PRDM3) is a protein that in humans is encoded by the \"MECOM\" gene. EVI1 was first identified as a common retroviral integration site in AKXD murine myeloid tumors. It has since been identified in a plethora of other organisms, and seems to play a relatively conserved developmental role in embryogenesis. EVI1 is a nuclear transcription factor involved in many signaling pathways for both coexpression and coactivation of cell cycle genes.\n\nThe EVI1 gene is located in the human genome on chromosome 3 (3q26.2). The gene spans 60 kilobases and encodes 16 exons, 10 of which are protein-coding. The first in-frame ATG start codon is in exon 3.\n\nA large number of transcript variations exist, encoding different isoforms or chimeric proteins. Some of the most common ones are:\n\nThe MECOM is primarily found in the nucleus, either soluble or bound to DNA. The 145kDa isoform is the most-studied, encoding 1051 amino acids, although there are many EVI1 fusion products detectable in cells expressing EVI1.\n\nThe MECOM protein contains 2 domains characterized by 7 zinc finger motifs followed by a proline-rich transcription repression domain, 3 more zinc finger motifs and an acidic C-terminus.\n\nEVI1 is a proto-oncogene conserved across humans, mice, and rats, sharing 91% homology in nucleotide sequence and 94% homology in amino acid sequence between humans and mice. It is a transcription factor localized to the nucleus and binds DNA through specific conserved sequences of GACAAGATA with the potential to interact with both corepressors and coactivators.\n\n\n\nEVI1 has been described as a proto-oncogene since its first discovery in 1988. Overexpression and aberrant expression of EVI1 has been associated with human acute myelogenous leukemia (AML), myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML), and more recently has been shown as a poor prognostic indicator. Its function in these cells may be regulated by phosphorylation of serine196, in its N-terminal DNA binding domain. All of these involve erratic cellular development and differentiation in the bone marrow leading to dramatic alterations in the normal population of blood cells. EVI1 has also been found to play a role in solid ovarian and colon tumors, although it is not yet well characterized in this context. It has been hypothesized that it acts as a survival factor in tumor cell lines, preventing therapeutic-induced apoptosis and rendering the tumor cells more resistant to current treatments.\n\nEVI1 has been shown to be involved in the downstream signaling pathway of transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β). TGF-β, along with other TGF-β family ligands such as bone morphogenic protein (BMP) and activin are involved in regulating important cellular functions such as proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis, and matrix production. These biological roles are not only important for cellular development, but also in understanding oncogenesis.\n\nTGF-β signaling induces transcription of the cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitors p15 or p21, which, as a consequence, act to halt the cell cycle and stop proliferation. This inhibition can lead to cellular differentiation or apoptosis, and therefore any resistance to TGF-β is thought to contribute in some way to human leukemogenesis. As shown in the figure below, the downstream effectors of TGF-β are the Smad receptors (also known as receptor-activated Smads). Smad2 and Smad3 are phosphorylated in response to TGF-β ligand binding, and translocate into the nucleus of the cell, where they can then bind to DNA and other transcription factors. Stable binding to promoters occurs through a conserved MH1 domain, and transcription activation occurs through an MH2 domain, and involves accompanying coactivators such as CBP/p300 and Sp1.\n\nThe majority of literature discusses the interaction between EVI1 and Smad3, however there have been some experiments done showing that EVI1 interacts with all of the Smad proteins at varying levels, indicating a potential involvement in all of the pathways that include Smads as downstream effectors. The translocation of phosphorylated Smad3 into the nucleus allows for direct interaction with EVI1, mediated by the first zinc finger domain on EVI1 and the MH2 domain on Smad3. As the Smad3 MH2 domain is required for transcription activation, EVI1 binding effectively prevents transcription of the TGF-β induced anti-growth genes through structural blocking, and also leads to recruitment of other transcriptional repressors (see Epigenetics). By inhibiting an important checkpoint pathway for tumor suppression and growth control, overexpression or aberrant expression of EVI1 has characteristic oncogenic activity.\n\nAs an additional confirmation of the role of EVI1 expression on cell cycle progression, it has been shown that high EVI1 expression is correlated with the well-known tumor suppressor and cell cycle mediator Retinoblastoma, remaining in a hyperphosphorylated state, even in the presence of TGF-β.\n\nc-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) is a MAP kinase activated by extracellular stress signals such as gamma-radiation, ultraviolet light, Fas ligand, tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α), and interleukin-1. Phosphorylation on two separate residues, Thr183 and Tyr185, cause JNK to become activated and translocate to the nucleus to phosphorylate and activate key transcription factors for the apoptotic response.\n\nExperiments co-expressing EVI1 and JNK have shown that levels of JNK-phosphorylated transcription factors (such as c-Jun) are drastically decreased in the presence of EVI1. Binding of EVI1 and JNK has been shown to occur through the first zinc finger motif on EVI1, and that this interaction does not block JNK phosphorylation and activation, but blocks JNK binding to substrate in the nucleus. Subsequent \"in vitro\" assays showed that stress-induced cell death from a variety of stimuli is significantly inhibited by EVI1 and JNK binding.\n\nIt is interesting to note that EVI1 does not bind other MAP kinases such as p38 or ERK.\n\nAmong the many other observed defects, EVI1 mouse embryos have been shown to have defects in both the development and proliferation of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). It is presumed that this is due to direct interaction with the transcription factor GATA-2, which is crucial for HSC development. It has subsequently been shown many times \"in vitro\" that EVI1 upregulation can induce proliferation and differentiation of HSCs and some other cell types such as rat fibroblasts.\n\nHowever, existing data is inconclusive regarding the absolute role of EVI1 in cell cycle progression. It appears to depend on the specific cell type, cell line and growth conditions being used as to whether EVI1 expression induces growth arrest or cell differentiation/proliferation, or whether it has any effect at all. The data showing direct interaction of EVI1 with the promoters for a diverse array of genes supports the theory that this is a complex transcription factor associated with many different signalling pathways involved in development and growth.\n\nAlthough the literature is limited on the subject, the well-documented effects on HSCs imply that there is a potential indirect effect of aberrant EVI1 expression on tumoral angiogenesis. HSCs secrete angiopoietin, and its receptor molecule Tie2 has been implicated in angiogenesis of tumors in both humans and mice. Upregulation of Tie2 has been shown to occur under hypoxic conditions, and to increase angiogenesis when coinjected with tumor cells in mice. Observations that EVI1 mutants have substantially downregulated Tie2 and Ang-I expression, therefore, hints at an interesting role of high EVI1 expression in tumor progression. This is likely, at least in part, a reason for the widespread hemorrhaging and minimal vascular development in EVI1 deleted embryos, and has potential to indicate yet another reason for poor prognosis of EVI1 positive cancers.\n\nEVI1 has also been shown to directly interact with C-terminal-binding protein (CtBP, a known transcriptional repressor) through \"in vitro\" techniques such as yeast 2-hybrid screens and immunoprecipitation. This interaction has been specifically shown to rely on amino acids 544-607 on the EVI1 protein, a stretch that contains two CtBP-binding consensus motifs. This binding leads to recruitment of histone deacetylases (HDACs) as well as many other corepressor molecules leading to transcription repression via chromatin remodelling.\n\nEVI1 interaction with Smad3 followed by recruitment of corepressors can inhibit transcription and de-sensitize a cell to TGF-β signaling without ever displacing Smad3 from a gene's promoter. The epigenetic modification is clearly enough to make the DNA inaccessible to the transcription machinery.\n\nAlthough EVI1 has mainly been implicated as a transcription repressor, there is some data that has shown a possible dual role for this protein. Studies show that EVI1 also binds to known coactivators cAMP responsive element binding protein (CBP) and p300/CBP-associated factor (P/CAF). These both have histone acetyltransferase activity, and lead to subsequent transcription activation. In addition, structural changes have been visualized within the nucleus of a cell, depending on the presence of corepressors or coactivators, leading researchers to believe that EVI1 has a unique response to each kind of molecule. In approximately 90% of cells, EVI1 is diffuse within the nucleus; however, when CBP and P/CAF are added, extensive nuclear speckle formation occurs. The complete physiological repercussions of this complex role of EVI1 have yet to be elucidated, however, could provide insight into the wide variety of results that have been reported regarding the effect of EVI1 on \"in vitro\" cell proliferation.\n\nInteraction with corepressors and coactivators appears to occur in distinct domains, and there are theories that EVI1 exists in a periodical, reversible acetylated state within the cell. Contrasting theories indicate that the interplay between different EVI1 binding proteins acts to stabilize interactions with different transcription factors and DNA, leading to a response of EVI1 to a diverse set of stimuli.\n\nSince it was first identified in murine myeloid leukemia as a common site of retroviral integration into the chromosome, EVI1 and its surrounding DNA have been a site of many identified chromosomal translocations and abnormalities. This can lead to aberrant expression of EVI1, and, as shown in the figure below, commonly involved chromosomal breakpoints have been mapped extensively. One major cause of EVI1 activation and consequent overexpression is a clinical condition called 3q21q26 syndrome from inv(3)(q21q26) or t(3;3)(q21;q26). The result is the placement of a strong enhancing region for the housekeeping gene Ribophorin 1 (RPN1) next to the EVI1 coding sequence, resulting in a dramatic increase of EVI1 levels in the cell.\n\nA summary of common chromosomal abnormalities involving EVI1 and its fusion genes can be found in a review by Nucifora \"et al.\".\n\nThe most common circumstance involves chromosomal translocations in human AML or MDS, leading to constitutive expression of EVI1 and eventually to cancer. Not only are these abnormalities in the 3q26 region associated with very poor patient prognosis they are also commonly accompanied by additional karyotypic changes such as chromosome 7 monosomy, deletion of the short arm of chromosome 7, or partial deletions of chromosome 5. In addition, it has been shown that development of acute myelogenous leukemia is likely due to several sequential genetic changes, and that expression of EVI1 or its chimeric counterparts ME and AME alone is not enough to completely block myeloid differentiation. BCR-Abl, a fusion gene caused by t(9;22)(q34;q11)is thought to have a cooperative effect with EVI1 during the progression of AML and CML. Together, these two systems disrupt tyrosine kinase signaling and hematopoietic gene transcription.\n\nDespite the extensively studied chromosomal abnormalities at the EVI1 locus, it should be noted that, in anywhere from 10-50% of identified cases, EVI1 overexpression is detectable without any chromosomal abnormalities, indicating that there are other not-yet-understood systems, likely epigenetic, leading to EVI1 promoter activation. In many of these cases, it is noted that a variety of 5' transcript variants are detectable at relatively high levels. Clinical studies have shown that these variants (EVI1_1a, EVI1_1b, EVI1_1d, EVI1_3L) as well as the MDS1-EVI1 fusion transcript are all associated with poor prognosis and increased likelihood of rapid remission in cases of \"de novo\" AML.\n\nVery little research has been done in an attempt to therapeutically target EVI1 or any of its chimeric counterparts. However, since it has become an established fact that overexpression of EVI1 derivatives is a bad prognostic indicator, it is likely that the literature will begin to examine specific targeting within the next few years.\n\nOne very promising therapeutic agent for myelogenous leukemia and potentially other forms of cancer is arsenic trioxide (ATO). One study has been done showing that ATO treatment leads to specific degradation of the AML1/MDS1/EVI1 oncoprotein and induces both apoptosis and differentiation. As an atypical use of traditional pharmacogenomics, this knowledge may lead to an increased ability to treat EVI1 positive leukemias that would normally have poor prognoses. If it is established that a clinical cancer case is EVI1 positive, altering the chemotherapeutic cocktail to include a specific EVI1 antagonist may aid to increase lifespan and prevent potential relapse. Arsenic is a fairly ancient human therapeutic agent, however it has only recently returned to the forefront of cancer treatment. It has been observed that it not only induces apoptosis but can also inhibit the cell cycle, and has marked anti-angiogenesis effects. As of 2006, Phase I and II clinical trials were being conducted to test this compound on a wide variety of cancer types, and currently (2008) a number of publications are showing positive outcomes in individual case studies, both pediatric and adult. \n\nThe important and essential role of EVI1 in embryogenesis clearly indicates a close association with hormonal fluctuations in developing cells. However, to date, the presence of EVI1 in cancer has not been linked to aberrant production of any hormones or hormone receptors. It is likely that EVI1 is far enough downstream of hormonal signaling that once overproduced, it can function independently.\n\nAreas where retroviral integration into the human genome is favored such as EVI1 have very important implications for the development of gene therapy. It was initially thought that delivery of genetic material through a non-replicating virus vector would pose no significant risk, as the likelihood of a random incorporation near a proto-oncogene was minimal. By 2008 it was realised that sites such as EVI1 are \"highly over-represented\" when it comes to vector insertions.\n\nEVI1 has been shown to interact with:\n\n", "id": "14766209", "title": "MECOM"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18035176", "text": "TOPO cloning\n\nTOPO cloning is a molecular biology technique in which DNA fragments are cloned into specific vectors without the requirement for DNA ligases. For TOPO TA cloning, the Taq polymerase has a nontemplate-dependent terminal transferase activity that adds a single deoxyadenosine (A) to the 3'-end of the PCR products. This characteristic is exploited in TOPO-cloning For Blunt End TOPO cloning, the recipient vector does not have overhangs and blunt-ended DNA fragments can be cloned.\n\nThe technique utilises the inherent biological activity of DNA topoisomerase I. The biological role of topoisomerase is to cleave and rejoin supercoiled DNA ends to facilitate replication. Vaccinia virus topoisomerase I specifically recognises DNA sequence 5´-(C/T)CCTT-3'. During replication, the enzyme digests DNA specifically at this sequence, unwinds the DNA and re-ligates it again at the 3' phosphate group of the thymidine base.\n\nTOPO vectors are designed in such a way that they carry this specific sequence 5´-(C/T)CCTT-3' at the two linear ends. The linear vector DNA already has the topoisomerase enzyme covalently attached to both of its strands' free 3' ends. This is then mixed with PCR products. When the free 5' ends of the PCR product strands attach to the topoisomerase/3' end of each vector strand, the strands are covalently linked by the already bound topoisomerase. This reaction proceeds efficiently when this solution is incubated at room temperature with required salt. Different types of vectors are used for cloning fragments amplified by either Taq or Pfu polymerase as Taq polymerase (unlike Pfu) leaves an extra \"A\" nucleotide at the 3'end during amplification.\n\nThe TA TOPO cloning technique relies on the ability of adenine (A) and thymine (T) (complementary basepairs) on different DNA fragments to hybridize and, in the presence of ligase or topoisomerase, become ligated together. \nThe insert is created by PCR using Taq DNA polymerase, a polymerase that lacks 3' to 5' proofreading activity and with a high probability adds a single, 3'-adenine overhang to each end of the PCR product. It is best if the PCR primers have guanines at the 5' end as this maximizes probability of Taq DNA polymerase adding the terminal adenosine overhang. Thermostable polymerases containing extensive 3´ to 5´ exonuclease activity should not be used as they do not leave the 3´ adenine-overhangs.\nThe target vector is linearized and cut with a blunt-end restriction enzyme. This vector is then tailed with dideoxythymidine triphosphate (ddTTP) using terminal transferase. It is important to use ddTTP to ensure the addition of only one T residue. This tailing leaves the vector with a single 3'-overhanging thymine residue on each blunt end.\n\nPolymerases (such as Phusion) or restriction enzymes that produce blunt ends can also be used for TOPO cloning. Rather than relying on sticky ends, the blunt end TOPO vector has blunt ends where the topoisomerase molecules are bound. Commercial kits, such as the Zero Blunt® Cloning Kit from Invitrogen, are available. \n\n 3. Bolt PCR Cloning Kit. \"www.atum.bio\"\n", "id": "18035176", "title": "TOPO cloning"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18037452", "text": "Treefinder\n\nTreefinder is a computer program for the likelihood-based reconstruction of phylogenetic trees from molecular sequences. It was written by Gangolf Jobb, a former researcher at the University of Munich, Germany, and was originally released in 2004. Treefinder is free of charge, though the most recent license prohibits its use in many major western countries.\n\nA platform-independent graphical environment integrates a standard suite of analyses: phylogeny reconstruction, bootstrap analysis, model selection, hypothesis testing, tree calibration, manipulation of trees and sequence data. Treefinder is scriptable through a proprietary scripting language called TL.\n\nTreefinder has an efficient tree search algorithm that can infer trees with thousands of species within a short time. Result trees are displayed and can then be saved as a reconstruction report, which may serve as an input for further analysis, for example hypothesis testing. The report contains all information about the tree and the models used. Treefinder also supports exporting results as NEWICK or NEXUS files.\n\nThe software supports a broad collection of models of sequence evolution. The June 2008 release implements 7 models of nucleotide substitution (HKY, TN, J1, J2, J3 (= TIM), TVM, GTR), 14 empirical models of amino acid substitution (BLOSUM, cpREV, Dayhoff, JTT, LG, mtArt, mtMam, mtREV, PMB, rtREV, betHIV, witHIV, VT, WAG), 4 substitution models of structured rRNA (bactRNA, eukRNA, euk23RNA, mitoRNA), the 6-state \"Dayhoff Groups\" protein model (DG), 2-state and 3-state models of DNA (GTR3, GTR2), a parametric mixed model (MIX) mixing the empirical models of proteins or rRNA, and also a user-definable GTR-type model (MAP) mapping characters to states as needed. Three models of among-site rate heterogeneity are available (Gamma, Gamma+I, I), which can be combined with any of the substitution models. One can assume different models for different partitions of a sequence alignment, and partitions may be assumed to evolve at different speeds. All parameters of the models can be estimated from the data by maximization of likelihood. Certain TL expressions, the \"model expressions\", allow the concise notation of complex models, together with their parameters and optimization modes.\n\nTreefinder's original publication from 2004 has been cited several hundred times in the scientific literature.\n\nDue to racist personal beliefs against immigration and interracial parenting, the author disallowed the use of Treefinder in the USA on February 1st, 2015. Due to personal beliefs against immigration policies in Europe the author again changed the license terms to exclude use in Germany, Austria, France, the Netherlands, Belgium, Great Britain, Sweden, and Denmark as of October 1st, 2015, in a statement that decried interracial marriage, immigration, mixed-racial heritage, and implied that migrants had infiltrated the government \"and everything\" to \"indoctrinate\" children. The page publishing the licence changes is, as of 24/10/2017, headed \"Do you want your grandchildren look like immigrants? Yes? - Then keep supporting the globalists who have infiltrated your government and everything. They promote migration and miscegenation. They indoctrinate your children and bring them together with foreigners, e.g. at schools and universities\". Due to these license changes, the journal that published the original application note has since retracted it; Jobb refuted that this was in line with their own policy, stating that he wished to protest \"US imperialism\" and \"EU tyranny\".\n\n\n", "id": "18037452", "title": "Treefinder"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18129067", "text": "Amplified Ribosomal DNA Restriction Analysis\n\nAmplified rDNA (Ribosomal DNA) Restriction Analysis is the extension of the technique of RFLP (restriction fragment length polymorphism) to the gene encoding the small (16s) ribosomal subunit of bacteria. The technique involves an enzymatic amplification using primers directed at the conserved regions at the ends of the 16s gene, followed by digestion using tetracutter Restriction enzymes. The pattern obtained is said to be representative of the species analysed. Patterns obtained from several restriction enzymes can be used to phylogenetically characterize cultured isolates and 16s genes obtained through cloning from community DNA\nOriginally developed by Vaneechoutte \"et al.\", who used the method to characterize Mycobacterium species, the method has been used by many more for similar characterization of other bacterial species Based on the simple formula for the frequency of random occurrence of a Restriction site, a 4-bp sequence can occur once every 256bp. A restriction enzyme having a recognition site of more than 4bp would be irrelevant with respect to a gene of approximately 1500bp such as that coding for the 16s ribosomal subunit. A number of tetracutter Restriction enzymes are available in the market. For the sake of statistical significance, at least three restriction enzymes must be used for the analysis to overcome the probability of certain restriction enzymes to yield similar patterns for not so unrelated organisms. \n\nThe amplicon to be analysed must preferably correspond to a size of greater than 1000bp, purely for the sake of encountering a greater possibility of the restriction site. The amplicons must be preferably purified before digestion. This can be done by numerous commercially available purification kits. Care should be taken to choose the restriction enzymes. Certain restriction enzymes recognize the same sites, and cannot contribute productively to the analysis. Overnight digestion (10–16 hours) of about 300-500 ng of amplicon DNA in a 20 μL system with 4-5 units of Restriction Enzyme along with the recommended buffer at the prescribed temperature is recommended. Following digestion, the reaction is stopped and the entire digest run in a 2-3% agarose gel at 90-100V. The gel should be of a length that would allow proper resolution of minor fragments, as small as 100–200 bp. \n\nAnalysis of the patterns is done with methods used for RAPD patterns. Clusters of related bacteria can be represented in the form of a cladogram or phylogram. After initial analysis a multivariate analysis program such as NT-SYS or PAST furnishing details about the presence or absence of bands, marked as 1(for presence) and 0(for absence). The data can be subsequently used for generating a phylogram or cladogram. The data table can be used to plot a phylogenetic tree that would indicate the relationship of the organisms based on the restriction pattern obtained from their respective 16s genes. Commercial software is also available for the analysis of these patterns, most used are the packages GelCompar II and BioNumerics.\n", "id": "18129067", "title": "Amplified Ribosomal DNA Restriction Analysis"}
