{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2285013", "text": "Cell therapy\n\nCell therapy (also called cellular therapy or cytotherapy) is therapy in which cellular material is injected into a patient; this generally means intact, living cells. For example, T cells capable of fighting cancer cells via cell-mediated immunity may be injected in the course of immunotherapy.\n\nCell therapy originated in the nineteenth century when scientists experimented by injecting animal material in an attempt to prevent and treat illness. Although such attempts produced no positive benefit, further research found in the mid twentieth century that human cells could be used to help prevent the human body rejecting transplanted organs, leading in time to successful bone marrow transplantation.\n\nToday two distinct categories of cell therapy are recognized.\n\nThe first category is cell therapy in mainstream medicine. This is the subject of intense research and the basis of potential therapeutic benefit. Such research can be controversial when it involves human embryonic material.\n\nThe second category is in alternative medicine, and perpetuates the practice of injecting animal materials in an attempt to cure disease. This practice, according to the American Cancer Society, is not backed by any medical evidence of effectiveness, and can have deadly consequences.\n\nCell therapy can be defined as therapy in which cellular material is injected into a patient.\n\nThere are two branches of cell therapy: one is legitimate and established, whereby human cells are transplanted from a donor to a patient; the other is dangerous alternative medicine, whereby injected animal cells are used to attempt to treat illness.\n\nThe origins of cell therapy can perhaps be traced to the nineteenth century, when Charles-Édouard Brown-Séquard (1817–1894) injected animal testicle extracts in an attempt to stop the effects of aging. In 1931 Paul Niehans (1882–1971) – who has been called the inventor of cell therapy – attempted to cure a patient by injecting material from calf embryos. Niehans claimed to have treated many people for cancer using this technique, though his claims have never been validated by research.\n\nIn 1953 researchers found that laboratory animals could be helped not to reject organ transplants by pre-inoculating them with cells from donor animals; in 1968, in Minnesota, the first successful human bone marrow transplantation took place.\n\nBone marrow transplants have been found to be effective, along with some other kinds of human cell therapy – for example in treating damaged knee cartilage. In recent times, cell therapy using human material has been recognized as an important field in the treatment of human disease. The experimental field of Stem cell therapy has shown promise for new types of treatment.\n\nIn mainstream medicine, cell therapy is supported by a distinct healthcare industry which sees strong prospects for future growth.\n\nIn allogeneic cell therapy the donor is a different person to the recipient of the cells. In pharmaceutical manufacturing, the allogenic methodology is promising because unmatched allogenic therapies can form the basis of \"off the shelf\" products. There is research interest in attempting to develop such products to treat conditions including Crohn's disease and a variety of vascular conditions.\n\nResearch into human embryonic stem cells is controversial, and regulation varies from country to country, with some countries banning it outright. Nevertheless, these cells are being investigated as the basis for a number of therapeutic applications, including possible treatments for diabetes and Parkinson's disease.\n\nCell therapy is targeted at many clinical indications in multiple organs and by several modes of cell delivery. Accordingly, the specific mechanisms of action involved in the therapies are wide ranging. However, there are two main principles by which cells facilitate therapeutic action:\n\n\nNeural stem cells (NSCs) are the subject of ongoing research for possible therapeutic applications, for example for treating a number of neurological disorders such as Parkinson's disease and Huntington's disease.\n\nMSCs are immunomodulatory, multipotent and fast proliferating and these unique capabilities mean they can be used for a wide range of treatments including immune-modulatory therapy, bone and cartilage regeneration, myocardium regeneration and the treatment of Hurler syndrome, a skeletal and neurological disorder.\n\nResearchers have demonstrated the use of MSCs for the treatment of osteogenesis imperfecta (OI). Horwitz et al. transplanted bone marrow (BM) cells from human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-identical siblings to patients suffering from OI. Results show that MSCs can develop into normal osteoblasts, leading to fast bone development and reduced fracture frequencies. A more recent clinical trial showed that allogeneic fetal MSCs transplanted in utero in patients with severe OI can engraft and differentiate into bone in a human fetus.\n\nBesides bone and cartilage regeneration, cardiomyocyte regeneration with autologous BM MSCs has also been reported recently. Introduction of BM MSCs following myocardial infarction (MI) resulted in significant reduction of damaged regions and improvement in heart function. Clinical trials for treatment of acute MI with Prochymal by Osiris Therapeutics are underway. Also, a clinical trial revealed huge improvements in nerve conduction velocities in Hurler’s Syndrome patients infused with BM MSCs from HLA-identical siblings.\n\nHSCs possess the ability to self-renew and differentiate into all types of blood cells, especially those involved in the human immune system. Thus, they can be used to treat blood and immune disorders. Since human bone marrow (BM) grafting was first published in 1957, there have been significant advancements in HSCs therapy. Following that, syngeneic marrow infusion and allogeneic marrow grafting were performed successfully. HSCs therapy can also render its cure by reconstituting damaged blood-forming cells and restoring the immune system after high-dose chemotherapy to eliminate disease.\n\nThere are three types of HSCT: syngeneic, autologous, and allogeneic transplants. Syngeneic transplantations occur between identical twins. Autologous transplantations use the HSCs obtained directly from the patient and hence do not cause any complications of tissue incompatibility; whereas allogeneic transplantations involve the use of donor HSCs, either genetically related or unrelated to the recipient. To lower the risks of transplant, which include graft rejection and Graft-Versus-Host Disease (GVHD), allogeneic HSCT must satisfy compatibility at the HLA loci (i.e. genetic matching to reduce the immunogenicity of the transplant). Mismatch of HLA loci would result in treatment-related mortality and higher risk of acute GVHD.\n\nIn addition to BM derived HSCs, the use of alternative sources such as umbilical cord blood (UCB) and peripheral blood stem cells (PBSCs) has been increasing. In comparison with BM derived HSCs recipients, PBSCs recipients afflicted with myeloid malignancies reported a faster engraftment and better overall survival. However, this was at the expense of increased rate of GVHD. Also, the use of UCB requires less stringent HLA loci matching, although the time of engraftment is longer and graft failure rate is higher.\n\nIn alternative medicine, cell therapy is defined as the injection of non-human cellular animal material in an attempt to treat illness. Quackwatch labels this as \"senseless\", since \"cells from the organs of one species cannot replace the cells from the organs of other species\" and because a number of serious adverse effects have been reported.\n\nOf this alternative, animal-based form of cell therapy, the American Cancer Society say: \"Available scientific evidence does not support claims that cell therapy is effective in treating cancer or any other disease. It may in fact be lethal ...\".\n\n", "id": "2285013", "title": "Cell therapy"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5924450", "text": "Subcellular localization\n\nThe cells of eukaryotic organisms are elaborately subdivided into functionally-distinct membrane-bound compartments. Some major constituents of eukaryotic cells are: extracellular space, cytoplasm, nucleus, mitochondria, Golgi apparatus, endoplasmic reticulum (ER), peroxisome, vacuoles, cytoskeleton, nucleoplasm, nucleolus, nuclear matrix and ribosomes.\n\nBacteria also have subcellular localizations that can be separated when the cell is fractionated. The most common localizations referred to include the cytoplasm, the cytoplasmic membrane (also referred to as the inner membrane in Gram-negative bacteria), the cell wall (which is usually thicker in Gram-positive bacteria) and the extracellular environment. The cytoplasm, the cytoplasmic membrane and the cell wall are subcellular localizations, whereas the extracellular environment is clearly not. Most Gram-negative bacteria also contain an outer membrane and periplasmic space. Unlike eukaryotes, most bacteria contain no membrane-bound organelles, however there are some exceptions (i.e. magnetosomes).\n\nCurated protein subcellular locations can be searched in UniProtKB. There are several computationally predicted protein subcellular location databases, constructed by Dr. Min's group at Youngstown State University, including the fungal secretome knowledgebase (FunSecKB), the fungal secretome and subcellular proteome knowledgebase - version 2 (FunSecKB2), the plant secretome and subcellular proteome knowledgebase (PlantSecKB), MetazSecKB for human and animals, and ProtSecKB for protists. And there are also a few others, such as the lactic acid bacterial secretome database. Though there are some inaccuracies in the computational prediction, these databases provide useful resources for further characterizing the protein subcellular locations.\n\n", "id": "5924450", "title": "Subcellular localization"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=750894", "text": "Nuclear lamina\n\nThe nuclear lamina is a dense (~30 to 100 nm thick) fibrillar network inside the nucleus of most cells. It is composed of intermediate filaments and membrane associated proteins. Besides providing mechanical support, the nuclear lamina regulates important cellular events such as DNA replication and cell division. Additionally, it participates in chromatin organization and it anchors the nuclear pore complexes embedded in the nuclear envelope.\n\nThe nuclear lamina is associated with the inner face of the double bilayer nuclear envelope, whereas the outer face is continuous with the endoplasmic reticulum. The nuclear lamina is similar in structure to the nuclear matrix, but the latter extends throughout the nucleoplasm.\n\nThe nuclear lamina consists of two components, lamins and nuclear lamin-associated membrane proteins. The lamins are type V intermediate filaments which can be categorized as either A-type (lamin A, C) or B-type(lamin B, B) according to homology of their DNA sequences, biochemical properties and cellular localization during the cell cycle. Type V intermediate filaments differ from cytoplasmic intermediate filaments in the way that they have an extended rod domain (42 amino acid longer), that they all carry a nuclear localization signal (NLS) at their C-terminus and that they display typical tertiary structures. Lamin polypeptides have an almost complete α-helical conformation with multiple α-helical domains separated by non-α-helical linkers that are highly conserved in length and amino acid sequence. Both the C-terminus and the N-terminus are non α-helical, with the C-terminus displaying a globular structure. Their molecular weight ranges from 60 to 80 kilodaltons (kDa).\nIn the amino acid sequence of a nuclear lamin, there are also two phosphoacceptor sites present, flanking the central rod domain. A phosphorylation event at the onset of mitosis leads to a conformational change which causes the disassembly of the nuclear lamina. (discussed later in the article)\n\nIn the vertebrate genome, lamins are encoded by three genes. By alternative splicing, at least seven different polypeptides (splice variants) are obtained, some of which are specific for germ cells and play an important role in the chromatin reorganisation during meiosis. Not all organisms have the same number of lamin encoding genes; \"Drosophila melanogaster\" for example has only 2 genes, whereas \"Caenorhabditis elegans\" has only one.\n\nThe presence of lamin polypeptides is an exclusive property of Metazoan organisms.\n\nThe nuclear lamin-associated membrane proteins are either integral or peripheral membrane proteins. The most important are lamin associated polypeptide 1 and 2 (LAP, LAP2), emerin, lamin B-receptor (LBR), otefin and MAN. Due to their positioning within or their association with the inner membrane, they mediate the attachment of the nuclear lamina to the nuclear envelope.\n\nThe nuclear lamina is assembled by interactions of two lamin polypeptides in which the α-helical regions are wound around each other to form a two stranded α-helical coiled-coil structure, followed by a head-to-tail association of the multiple dimers. The linearly elongated polymer is extended laterally by a side-by-side association of polymers, resulting in a 2D structure underlying the nuclear envelope. Next to providing mechanical support to the nucleus, the nuclear lamina plays an essential role in chromatin organization, cell cycle regulation, DNA replication, DNA repair, cell differentiation and apoptosis.\n\nThe non-random organization of the genome strongly suggests that the nuclear lamina plays a role in chromatin organization. It has been shown that lamin polypeptides have an affinity for binding chromatin through their α-helical (rod like) domains at specific DNA sequences called \"matrix attachment regions\" (MAR). A MAR has a length of approximately 300–1000 bp and has a high A/T content. Lamin A and B can also bind core histones through a sequence element in their tail domain.\n\nChromatin that interacts with lamina forms lamina-assosiated domains (LADs). The average length of human LADs is 0.1–10 MBp. LADs are flanked by CTCF-binding cites.\n\nAt the onset of mitosis (prophase, prometaphase), the cellular machinery is engaged in the disassembly of various cellular components including structures such as the nuclear envelope, the nuclear lamina and the nuclear pore complexes. This nuclear breakdown is necessary to allow the mitotic spindle to interact with the (condensed) chromosomes and to bind them at their kinetochores.\n\nThese different disassembly events are initiated by the cyclin B/Cdk1 protein kinase complex (MPF). Once this complex is activated, the cell is forced into mitosis, by the subsequent activation and regulation of other protein kinases or by direct phosphorylation of structural proteins involved in this cellular reorganisation. After phosphorylation by cyclin B/Cdk, the nuclear lamina depolymerises and B-type lamins stay associated with the fragments of the nuclear envelope whereas A-type lamins remain completely soluble throughout the remainder of the mitotic phase.\n\nThe importance of the nuclear lamina breakdown at this stage is underlined by experiments where inhibition of the disassembly event leads to a complete cell cycle arrest.\n\nAt the end of mitosis, (anaphase, telophase) there is a nuclear reassembly which is highly regulated in time, starting with the association of 'skeletal' proteins on the surface of the still partially condensed chromosomes, followed by nuclear envelope assembly. Novel nuclear pore complexes are formed through which nuclear lamins are actively imported by use of their NLS. This typical hierarchy raises the question whether the nuclear lamina at this stage has a stabilizing role or some regulative function, for it is clear that it plays no essential part in the nuclear membrane assembly around chromatin.\n\nThe presence of lamins in embryonic development is readily observed in various model organisms such as \"Xenopus laevis\", the chick and mammals. In \"Xenopus laevis\", five different types were identified which are present in different expression patterns during the different stages of the embryonic development. The major types are LI and LII, which are considered homologs of lamin B and B2. LA are considered homologous to lamin A and LIII as a B-type lamin. A fourth type exists and is germ cell specific.\n\nIn the early embryonic stages of the chick, the only lamins present are B-type lamins. In further stages, the expression pattern of lamin B decreases and there is a gradual increase in the expression of lamin A. Mammalian development seems to progress in a similar way. In the latter case as well it is the B-type lamins that are expressed in the early stages. Lamin B1 reaches the highest expression level, whereas the expression of B2 is relatively constant in the early stages and starts to increase after cell differentiation. With the development of the different kinds of tissue in a relatively advanced developmental stage, there is an increase in the levels of lamin A and lamin C.\n\nThese findings would indicate that in its most basic form, a functional nuclear lamina requires only B-type lamins.\n\nVarious experiments show that the nuclear lamina plays a part in the elongation phase of DNA replication. It has been suggested that lamins provide a scaffold, essential for the assembly of the elongation complexes, or that it provides an initiation point for the assembly of this nuclear scaffold.\n\nNot only nuclear lamina associated lamins are present during replication, but free lamin polypeptides are present as well and seem to have some regulative part in the replication process.\n\nRepair of DNA double-strand breaks can occur by either of two processes, non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) or homologous recombination (HR). A-type lamins promote genetic stability by maintaining levels of proteins that have key roles in NHEJ and HR. Mouse cells deficient for maturation of prelamin A show increased DNA damage and chromosome aberrations and are more sensitive to DNA damaging agents. \n\nApoptosis (cellular suicide) is of the highest importance in homeostasis of tissue and in defending the organism against invasive entry of viruses or other pathogens. Apoptosis is a highly regulated process in which the nuclear lamina is disassembled in an early stage.\n\nIn contrast to the phosphorylation-induced disassembly during mitosis, the nuclear lamina is degraded by proteolytic cleavage, and both the lamins and the nuclear lamin-associated membrane proteins are targeted. This proteolytic activity is performed by members of the caspase-protein family who cleave the lamins after aspartic acid (Asp) residues.\n\nDefects in the genes encoding for nuclear lamin (such as lamin A and lamin B) have been implicated in a variety of diseases (laminopathies) such as:\n\n\n\n", "id": "750894", "title": "Nuclear lamina"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17157285", "text": "Biocrystallization\n\nBiocrystallization is the formation of crystals from organic macromolecules by living organisms. This may be a stress response, a normal part of metabolism such as processes that dispose of waste compounds, or a pathology. Template mediated crystallization is qualitatively different from \"in vitro\" crystallization. Inhibitors of biocrystallization are of interest in drug design efforts against lithiasis and against pathogens that feed on blood, since many of these organisms use this process to safely dispose of heme.\n\nUnder severe stress conditions the bacteria \"Escherichia coli\" protects its DNA from damage by sequestering it within a crystalline structure. This process is mediated by the stress response protein Dps and allows the bacteria to survive varied assaults such as oxidative stress, heat shock, ultraviolet light, gamma radiation and extremes of pH.\n\nBlood feeding organisms digest hemoglobin and release high quantities of free toxic heme. To avoid destruction by this molecule, the parasite biocrystallizes heme to form hemozoin. To date, the only definitively characterized product of hematin disposal is the pigment hemozoin. Hemozoin is \"per definitionem\" not a mineral and therefore not formed by biomineralization. Heme biocrystallization has been found in blood feeding organisms of great medical importance including \"Plasmodium\", \"Rhodnius\" and \"Schistosoma\". Heme biocrystallization is inhibited by quinoline antimalarials such as chloroquine.\n\nTargeting heme biocrystallization remains one of the most promising avenues for antimalarial drug development because the drug target is highly specific to the malarial parasite, and outside the genetic control of the parasite.\n\nLithiasis (formation of stones) is a global human health problem. Stones can form in both urinary and gastrointestinal tracts. Related to the formation of stones is the formation of crystals; this can occur in joints (e.g. gout) and in the viscera.\n\n", "id": "17157285", "title": "Biocrystallization"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14759577", "text": "Partner Institute for Computational Biology\n\nThe CAS-MPG Partner Institute for Computational Biology (PICB) was jointly established by the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) and the German Max Planck Society (MPG) in May 2005. It is located in Xu Hui district in Shanghai, P. R. China. \n\nThe institute focuses its research on the interface between theoretical and experimental molecular and cell biology. The procedures of the establishment of the institute as well as the recruitment of the directors follows the model of the Max-Planck-Society, while the institute itself is integral part of and administrated by the Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences (SIBS).\n\n", "id": "14759577", "title": "Partner Institute for Computational Biology"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9716795", "text": "Archaeocyte\n\nArchaeocytes (from Greek \"archaios\" \"beginning\" and \"kytos\" \"hollow vessel\") or amoebocytes are amoeboid cells found in sponges. They are totipotent and have varied functions depending on the species.\n\nArchaeocytes are along with other specialized sponge cells including collencytes and structural elements called spicules. They move about within the mesohyl with amoeba-like movements performing a number of important functions.\n\nCellular differentiation is an essential function of the archaeocyte. All specialized cells within the sponge have its origins with the archaeocyte. This is especially important in reproduction as the sex cells of the sponge in sexual reproduction are formed from these amoeboid cells. Similarly in asexual reproduction amoebocytes result in the formation of gemmules which are cyst-like spheres containing more amoebocytes as well as other sponge cells including the phylum specific choanocyte. These cells move within the walls of a sponge and form spicules.\n\n", "id": "9716795", "title": "Archaeocyte"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1091583", "text": "Dolichol\n\nDolichol refers to any of a group of long-chain mostly unsaturated organic compounds that are made up of varying numbers of isoprene units terminating in an α-saturated isoprenoid group, containing an alcohol functional group.\n\nDolichols play a role in the co-translational modification of proteins known as \"N\"-glycosylation in the form of dolichol phosphate. Dolichols function as a membrane anchor for the formation of the oligosaccharide Glc3-Man9-GlcNAc2 (where Glc is glucose, Man is mannose, and GlcNAc is N-acetylglucosamine). This oligosaccharide is transferred from the dolichol donor onto certain asparagine residues (onto a specific sequence that is \"Asn-X-Ser/Thr\") of newly forming polypeptide chains. Dolichol is also involved in transfer of the monosaccharides to the forming Glc3-Man9-GlcNAc2-Dolichol carrier.\n\nIn addition, dolichols can be adducted to proteins as a posttranslational modification, a process in which branched carbohydrate trees are formed on a dolichol moiety and then transferred to an assembly of proteins to form a large glycoprotein in the rough endoplasmic reticulum.\n\nDolichols are the major lipid component (14% by mass) of human substantia nigra (SN) neuromelanin.\nDolichol phosphate was discovered at the University of Liverpool in the 1960s, although researchers did not know its function at the time of discovery.\n\nDolichol has been suggested to be used as a biomarker for aging. During aging, the human brain shows a progressive increase in levels of dolichol, a reduction in levels of ubiquinone, but relatively unchanged concentrations of cholesterol and dolichyl phosphate. In the neurodegenerative disease Alzheimer's disease, the situation is reversed, with decreased levels of dolichol and increased levels of ubiquinone. The concentrations of dolichyl phosphate are also increased, while cholesterol remains unchanged. This study shows that the isoprenoid changes in Alzheimer's disease differ from those occurring during normal aging, and, therefore, this disease cannot be regarded as a result of premature aging. The increase in the sugar carrier dolichyl phosphate may reflect an increased rate of glycosylation in the diseased brain, and the increase in the endogenous anti-oxidant ubiquinone an attempt to protect the brain from oxidative stress, for instance, induced by lipid peroxidation.\n\nDolichol is a product of the HMG-CoA reductase pathway (also known as the mevalonate pathway), and as such their creation and availability are affected by mevalonate inhibition. First, a cis (or Z) -prenyltransferase catalyzes the condensation of farnesyl diphosphate (FPP) with a varying number (dependent on the particular cis-prenyltransferase) of isopentenyl diphosphate (IPP) molecules, resulting in the formation of a polyprenyl diphosphate (also known as dehydrodolichyl diphosphate). This subsequently undergoes loss of both phosphate groups, resulting in a polyprenol (dehydrodolichol). Lastly, the α isoprenoid unit is saturated by α-saturase (still a hypothetical enzyme), and this α-saturated polyprenyl alcohol is known as dolichol.\n\nDolichols are found in eukaryotes and in archaea, although similar polyprenols molecules are found in bacteria. Polyprenols in bacteria do not contain an α-saturated isoprenoid and are typically smaller in terms of isoprenoid units or carbon length. Polyprenols perform similar functions within bacteria; that is, they function as glycosyl carrier lipids involved in formation of complex branched polysaccharide. However, the cellular process they are involved in is not glycosylation, but instead cell wall biosynthesis. Statins decrease dolichol levels in the body.\n\nThe Australian pharmaceutical company Solagran has been investigating the medical significance of polyprenols and their substitution with dolichols when ingested where there is a deficiency. Trials of Ropren (already pharmaceutically registered as a hepatoprotector) in relation to neurodegenerative diseases (including Alzheimer's disease) in both Russia and Australia indicate considerable potential as a safe and effective treatment.\n\n\n", "id": "1091583", "title": "Dolichol"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18571243", "text": "Basophil activation\n\nAllergic symptoms are caused by an initial systemic histamine release by activated basophiles and mast cells, that may lead to shock with laryngeal edema, lower-airway obstruction and hypotension. This is why basophiles are considered with mast cells to be the key cells in allergic diseases.\nImmunoglobulin E (IgE) is a class of antibody (or immunoglobulin \"isotype\") that has only been found in mammals. It plays an important role in allergy, and is especially associated with type 1 hypersensitivity. There are receptors (FcεR) for the constant region of IgE, the Fc region, on several types of cells, including Mast cells and Basophils. Basophils contain many granules inside the cell, which are filled with a variety of active substance triggering an allergic response upon degranulation.\nThe cells get activated and start degranulation when the IgE antibody, bound to an allergen which can bind to the specific variable region of the IgE, the Fab region, bind to the Fc receptor\n\nIn most cases, a positive skin test is used in identification of allergies, but the activation of basophilic granulocytes with anti-IgE, the expression of the CD63 antigen on the cell surface (plasma membrane) allows identification of the allergen responsible for the hypersensitivity reaction without performing the common scratch test. Only a little amount of blood is needed for this experiment, which makes it comfortable to use since one can perform it in parallel to a normal blood checkup. It can be used for different allergies (e.g. bee venom, drugs, contrast media).\n\nDegranulated cell expose CD63 molecules on their outer cell membrane, hence the granules, which contain CD63 molecules on their inner surface, merged with the cell membrane. The inner cell surface of the granules becomes the outer cell surface of the basophile /mast cell during degranulation process.\nAs flow cytometry is a valuable tool for analyzing large numbers of cells and for identifying cell populations, even at low concentrations, the percentage of basophiles activated after in vitro stimulation by allergens and expressing the CD63 marker can be determined. The CD63 marker is an FITC labeled antigen which can bind to an CD63 protein and is used to sort the cells via FACS(Fluorescence activated cell sorting/sorter). This FITC labeled antigen emits light at a wavelength of 530 nm. As the emitted fluorescence intensity is proportional to the binding sites of each single cell, the intensity will increase according to the number of FITC- conjugated antibodies bound to CD63 expressing cells.\n\nA test tube is prepared with basophile stimulation buffer (BSB) including Interleukin 3 and an allergen which is to be tested. The blood sample is added and the tube is incubated at 37 °C for several minutes, to ensure that the allergens can bind to the IgE. By adding EDTA to the test tube, the degranulation process is stopped immediately. After degranulation a CD63 marker (labeld antibodies) is added to the test tube. Several minutes at room temperature gives the marker time to bind to the CD63 proteins on the cell membrane of the basophil. A lysing step is performed to lyse the red blood cells. Because they outnumber by far the leucocytes they need to be removed to do a FACS analysis of the Basophils.\n\n\n", "id": "18571243", "title": "Basophil activation"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3233543", "text": "Phosphoinositide phospholipase C\n\nPhosphoinositide phospholipase C (PLC) (, \"triphosphoinositide phosphodiesterase\", \"phosphoinositidase C\", \"1-phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate phosphodiesterase\", \"monophosphatidylinositol phosphodiesterase\", \"phosphatidylinositol phospholipase C\", \"PI-PLC\", \"1-phosphatidyl-D-myo-inositol-4,5-bisphosphate inositoltrisphosphohydrolase\") is a family of eukaryotic intracellular enzymes that play an important role in signal transduction processes. These enzymes belong to a larger superfamily of Phospholipase C. Other families of phospholipase C enzymes have been identified in bacteria and trypanosomes. Phospholipases C are phosphodiesterases.\n\nPhospholipase Cs participate in phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP) metabolism and lipid signaling pathways in a calcium-dependent manner. At present, the family consists of six sub-families comprising a total of 13 separate isoforms that differ in their mode of activation, expression levels, catalytic regulation, cellular localization, membrane binding avidity and tissue distribution. All are capable of catalyzing the hydrolysis of PIP into two important second messenger molecules, which go on to alter cell responses such as proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis, cytoskeleton remodeling, vesicular trafficking, ion channel conductance, endocrine function and neurotransmission.\n\nAll family members are capable of catalyzing the hydrolysis of PIP, a phosphatidylinositol at the inner leaflet of the plasma membrane into the two second messengers, inositol triphosphate (IP) and diacylglycerol (DAG).\n\nThe chemical reaction may be expressed as:\n\nThus, the two substrates of this enzyme are HO and 1-phosphatidyl-1D-myo-inositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP, phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate), whereas its two products are diacylglycerol and 1D-myo-inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP, inositol triphosphate).\n\nPLCs catalyze the reaction in two sequential steps. The first reaction is a phosphotransferase step that involves an intramolecular attack between the hydroxyl group at the 2' position on the inositol ring and the adjacent phosphate group resulting in a cyclic IP intermediate. At this point, DAG is generated. However, in the second phosphodiesterase step, the cyclic intermediate is held within the active site long enough to be attacked by a molecule of water, resulting in a final acyclic IP product. It should be mentioned that bacterial forms of the enzyme, which contain only the catalytic lipase domain, produce cyclic intermediates exclusively, whereas the mammalian isoforms generate predominantly the acyclic product. However, it is possible to alter experimental conditions (e.g., temperature, pH) \"in vitro\" such that some mammalian isoforms will alter the degree to which they produce mixtures of cyclic/acyclic products along with DAG. This catalytic process is tightly regulated by reversible phosphorylation of different phosphoinositides and their affinity for different regulatory proteins.\n\nPLCs perform their catalytic function at the plasma membrane where their substrate PIP is present. This membrane docking is mediated mostly by lipid-binding domains (e.g. PH domain and C2 domain) that display affinity for different phospholipid components of the plasma membrane. It is important to note that research has also discovered that, in addition to the plasma membrane, PLCs also exist within other sub-cellular regions such as the cytoplasm and nucleus of the cell. At present, it is unclear exactly what the definitive roles for these enzymes in these cellular compartments are, particularly the nucleus.\n\nPhospholipase C performs a catalytic mechanism, depleting PIP2 and generating inositol triphosphate (IP) and diacylglycerol (DAG).\n\nDepletion of PIP2 inactivates numerous effector molecules in the plasma membrane, most notably PIP2 dependent channels and transporters responsible for setting the cell's membrane potential.\n\nThe hydrolytic products also go on to modulate the activity of downstream proteins important for cellular signaling. IP3 is soluble, and diffuses through the cytoplasm and interacts with IP3 receptors on the endoplasmic reticulum, causing the release of calcium and raising the level of intracellular calcium.\n\n\"Further reading: Function of calcium in humans\"\n\nDAG remains within the inner leaflet of the plasma membrane due to its hydrophobic character, where it recruits protein kinase C (PKC), which becomes activated in conjunction with binding calcium ions. This results in a host of cellular responses through stimulation of calcium-sensitive proteins such as Calmodulin.\n\n\"Further reading: Function of protein kinase C\n\nIn terms of domain organization, all family members possess homologous X and Y catalytic domains in the form of a distorted Triose Phosphate Isomerase (TIM) barrel with a highly disordered, charged, and flexible intervening linker region. Likewise, all isoforms possess four EF hand domains, and a single C2 domain that flank the X and Y catalytic core. An N-terminal PH domain is present in every family except for the sperm-specific ζ isoform.\n\nSH2 (phosphotyrosine binding) and SH3 (proline-rich-binding) domains are found only in the γ form (specifically within the linker region), and only the ε form contains both guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) and RA (Ras Associating) domains. The β subfamily is distinguished from the others by the presence of a long C-terminal extension immediately downstream of the C2 domain, which is required for activation by G subunits, and which plays a role in plasma membrane binding and nuclear localization.\n\nThe Phospholipase C family consists of 13 isozymes split between six subfamilies, PLC-δ (1,3 & 4), -β(1-4), -γ(1,2), -ε, -ζ, and the recently discovered -η(1,2) isoform. Depending on the specific subfamily in question, activation can be highly variable. Activation by either G or G G-protein subunits (making it part of a G protein-coupled receptor signal transduction pathway) or by transmembrane receptors with intrinsic or associated tyrosine kinase activity has been reported. In addition, members of the Ras superfamily of small GTPases (namely the Ras and Rho subfamilies) have also been implicated. It should also be mentioned that all forms of Phospholipase C require calcium for activation, many of them possessing multiple calcium contact sites in the catalytic region. The only isoform that is known to be inactive at basal intracellular calcium levels is the δ subfamily of enzymes suggesting that they function as calcium amplifiers that become activated downstream of other PLC family members.\n\nPLC-β(1-4) (120-155kDa) are activated by G subunits through their C2 domain and long C-terminal extension. Gβγ subunits are known to activate the β2 and β3 isozymes only; however, this occurs through the PH domain and/or through interactions with the catalytic domain. The exact mechanism still requires further investigation. The PH domain of β2 and β3 plays a dual role, much like PLC-δ1, by binding to the plasma membrane, as well as being a site of interaction for the catalytic activator. However, PLC-β binds to the lipid surface independent of PIP with all isozymes preferring phosphoinositol-3-phosphate or neutral membranes.\n\nMembers of the Rho GTPase family (e.g., Rac1, Rac2, Rac3, and cdc42) have been implicated in their activation by binding to an alternate site on the N-terminal PH domain followed by subsequent recruitment to the plasma membrane. A crystal structure of Rac1 bound to the PH domain of PLCβ2 has been solved. Like PLC-δ1, many PLC-β isoforms (in particular, PLC-β1) have been found to take up residence in the nuclear compartment. A basic amino acid region within the enzyme's long C-terminal tail appears to function as a Nuclear Localization Signal for import into the nucleus. PLC-β1 seems to play unspecified roles in cellular proliferation and differentiation.\n\nPLC-γ (120-155kDa) is activated by receptor and non-receptor tyrosine kinases due to the presence of two SH2 and a single SH3 domain situated between a split PH domain within the linker region. Although this particular isoform does not contain classic nuclear export or localization sequences, it has been found within the nucleus of certain cell lines. There are two main isoforms of PLCγ expressed in human specimens, PLC-γ1 and PLC-γ2.\n\nPLC-γ2 plays a major role in BCR signal transduction. Absence of this enzyme in knockout specimens severely inhibits the development of B cells because the same signaling pathways necessary for antigen mediated B cell activation are necessary for B cell development from CLPs.\n\nIn B cell signaling, PI 3-kinase is recruited to the BCR early in the signal transduction pathway. PI-3K phosphorylates PIP (Phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate) into PIP (Phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate). The increase in concentration of PIP recruits PLC-γ2 to the BCR complex which binds to BLNK on the BCR scaffold and membrane PIP. PLC-γ2 is then phosphorylated by Syk on one site and Btk on two sites. PLC-γ2 then competes with PI-3K for PIP which it hydrolyzes into IP (inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate), which ultimately raises intercellular calcium, and diacylglycerol (DAG), which activates portions of the PKC family. Because PLC-γ2 competes for PIP with the original signaling molecule PI3K, it serves as a negative feedback mechanism.\n\nThe PLC-δ subfamily consists of three family members, δ1, 2, and 3. PLC-δ1 (85kDa) is the most well understood of the three. The enzyme is activated by high calcium levels generated by other PLC family members, and therefore functions as a calcium amplifier within the cell. Binding of its substrate PIP to the N-terminal PH domain is highly specific and functions to promote activation of the catalytic core. In addition, this specificity helps tether the enzyme tightly to the plasma membrane in order to access substrate through ionic interactions between the phosphate groups of PIP2 and charged residues in the PH domain. While the catalytic core does possess a weak affinity for PIP, the C2 domain has been shown to mediate calcium-dependent phospholipid binding as well. In this model, the PH and C2 domains operate in concert as a \"tether and fix\" apparatus necessary for processive catalysis by the enzyme.\n\nPLC-δ1 also possesses a classical leucine-rich nuclear export signal (NES) in its EF hand motif, as well as a Nuclear localization signal within its linker region. These two elements combined allow PLC-δ1 to actively translocate into and out of the nucleus. However, its function in the nucleus remains unclear.\n\nThe widely expressed PLC-δ1 isoform is the best-characterized phospholipase family member, as it was the first to have high-resolution X-ray crystal structures available for analysis. In terms of domain architecture, all of the enzymes are built upon a common PLC-δ backbone, wherein each family displays similarities, as well as obvious distinctions, that contribute to unique regulatory properties within the cell. Because it is the only family found expressed in lower eukaryotic organisms such as yeast and slime molds, it is considered the prototypical PLC isoform. The other family members more than likely evolved from PLC-δ as their domain architecture and mechanism of activation were expanded. Although a \"full\" crystal structure has not been obtained, high-resolution X-ray crystallography has yielded the molecular structure of the N-terminal PH domain complexed with its product IP3, as well as the remainder of the enzyme with the PH domain ablated. These structures have provided researchers with the necessary information to begin speculating about other family members such as PLCβ2.\n\n\nPLCB1; PLCB2; PLCB3; PLCB4; PLCD1; PLCD3; PLCD4; PLCE1;\nPLCG1; PLCG2; PLCH1; PLCH2; PLCL1; PLCL2; PLCZ1\n\n\n", "id": "3233543", "title": "Phosphoinositide phospholipase C"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=501210", "text": "Nocodazole\n\nNocodazole is an antineoplastic agent which exerts its effect in cells by interfering with the polymerization of microtubules. Microtubules are one type of fibre which constitutes the cytoskeleton, and the dynamic microtubule network has several important roles in the cell, including vesicular transport, forming the mitotic spindle and in cytokinesis. Several drugs including vincristine and colcemid are similar to nocodazole in that they interfere with microtubule polymerization.\n\nInterestingly, nocodazole has been shown to decrease the oncogenic potential of cancer cells via another microtubules-independent mechanisms. Nocodazole stimulates the expression of LATS2 which potently inhibits the Wnt signaling pathway by abrogating the interaction between the Wnt-dependent transcriptional co-factors beta-catenin and BCL9.\n\nIt is related to mebendazole by replacement of the left most benzene ring by thiophene.\n\nAs nocodazole affects the cytoskeleton, it is often used in cell biology experiments as a control: for example, some dominant negative Rho small GTPases cause a similar effect as nocodazole, and constitutively activated mutants often reverse or negate the effect.\n\nNocodazole is frequently used in cell biology laboratories to synchronize the cell division cycle. Cells treated with nocodazole arrest with a G2- or M-phase DNA content when analyzed by flow cytometry. Microscopy of nocodazole-treated cells shows that they do enter mitosis but cannot form metaphase spindles because microtubules (of which the spindles are made) cannot polymerise. The absence of microtubule attachment to kinetochores activates the spindle assembly checkpoint, causing the cell to arrest in prometaphase. For cell synchronization experiments, nocodazole is usually used at a concentration of 40–100 ng/mL of culture medium for a duration of 12–18 hours. Prolonged arrest of cells in mitosis due to nocodazole treatment typically results in cell death by apoptosis.\n\nAnother standard cell biological application of nocodazole is to induce the formation of Golgi ministacks in eukaryotic cells. The perinuclear structural organization of the Golgi apparatus in eukaryotes is dependent on microtubule trafficking, but disrupting the trafficking of Golgi elements from the endoplasmic reticulum treatment with nocodazole (33 \"μ\"M for 3 hours) induces numerous Golgi elements to form adjacent to ER exit sites. These functional Golgi ministacks remain distributed about the cell, unable to track forward to form a perinuclear Golgi since nocodazole has depolymerized the microtubules.\n\nAlso used with Mad2p protein as an anti-microtubule drug.\n", "id": "501210", "title": "Nocodazole"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13141637", "text": "Multinucleate\n\nMultinucleate cells (also called multinucleated or polynuclear cells) are eukaryotic cells that have more than one nucleus per cell, i.e., multiple nuclei share one common cytoplasm. Mitosis in multinucleate cells can occur either in a coordinated, synchronous manner where all nuclei divide simultaneously or asynchronously where individual nuclei divide independently in time and space. The multinucleate stage in the life cycle of some organisms is called plasmodium.\n\nAlthough not normally viewed as a case of multinucleation, plant cells share a common cytoplasm by plasmodesmata, and most cells in animal tissues are in communication with their neighbors via gap junctions.\n\nMultinucleate cells, depending on the mechanism they are formed, can be divided into:\n\nSome biologists use the term \"acellular\" to refer to multinucleate cell forms (syncitia and plasmodia), such as to differentiate \"acellular\" slime molds from the purely \"cellular\" ones (which do not form such structures). This usage is incorrect and highly misleading to laymen, and as such it is strongly discouraged.\n\nOsteoclasts are multinucleated cells which are found commonly in the human body that aid in the maintenance and repair of the bones by secreting acid that dissolves bone matter. They are typically found to have 5 nuclei per cell.\n\nMultinucleate cells can occur naturally under physiological conditions by the fusion of the plasma membranes of cells thus forming syncytia. Examples include the skeletal muscle cells of mammals, the tapetal cells of plants, and the storage cells of Douglas-fir seeds. The polymorphonuclear leukocytes of mammals are not polynuclear cells, although the lobes of their nuclei are so deeply bifurcated that they can appear so under suboptimal microscopy.\n\nThe chlorarachniophytes form multinucleate cells by fusion, being syncytia and not coenocytes. This syncytia is called plasmodium, in the sense of a multinucleate protoplast without a cell wall which exhibits amoeboid movement. Other examples include some plasmodiophorids, some haplosporidians, and the grex of cellular slime moulds (dictyostelids and acrasids).\n\nFurthermore, multinucleate cells are produced from specialized cell cycles in which nuclear division occurs without cytokinesis, thus leading to large coenocytes or plasmodia. In filamentous fungi, multinucleate cells may extend over hundreds of meters so that different regions of a single cell experience dramatically different microenvironments. Other examples include, the plasmodia of plasmodial slime molds (myxogastrids) and the schizont of the \"Plasmodium\" parasite which causes malaria.\n\nMultinucleated cells can also occur under pathological conditions as the consequence of a disturbed cell cycle control (e.g., binucleated cells and in metastasizing tumor cells).\n\nThe equivalent of multiple nuclei in prokaryotes is multiple nucleoids in bacteria such as in \"Proteus mirabilis\" swarmer cells.\n", "id": "13141637", "title": "Multinucleate"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13857654", "text": "Eutely\n\nEutelic organisms have a fixed number of somatic cells when they reach maturity, the exact number being constant for any one species. Development proceeds by cell division until maturity; further growth occurs via cell enlargement only. In nematodes the number of nuclei is also constant; there is growth in size of the body but this is due to the growth in the size of the cells (hypertrophy).\n\nMost eutelic organisms are microscopic. Examples include the rotifers, ascais, many species of nematodes (including the model organism \"Caenorhabditis elegans\" whose male individuals have 1031 cells), tardigrades, larvacea and dicyemida.\n\n", "id": "13857654", "title": "Eutely"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19372852", "text": "MecA (gene)\n\nThe \"mecA\" gene is a gene found in bacterial cells and , that allows a bacterium to be resistant to antibiotics such as methicillin, penicillin and other penicillin-like antibiotics. \n\nThe most commonly known carrier of the \"mecA\" gene is the bacterium known as Methicillin-resistant \"Staphylococcus aureus\" (MRSA). Apart from \"Staphylococcus aureus\" and other \"Staphylococcus\" species, it can also be found in \"Streptococcus pneumoniae\" strains resistant to penicillin-like antibiotics. In \"Staphylococcus\" species, \"mecA\" is spread on the SCC\"mec\" genetic element. resistant strains are responsible for many infections originating in hospitals. \n\nThe \"mecA\" gene does not allow the ringlike structure of penicillin-like antibiotics to bind to the enzymes that help form the cell wall of the bacterium (transpeptidases), and hence the bacteria is able to replicate as normal. mecA is located on the staphylococcal chromosome cassette \"mec\". The gene encodes the protein PBP2A (penicillin binding protein 2A). PBP2A has a low affinity for beta-lactam antibiotics such as methicillin and penicillin. This enables transpeptidase activity in the presence of beta-lactams, preventing them from inhibiting cell wall synthesis.\n\nMethicillin resistance was first exhibited in hospitals where the bacteria \"Staphylococcus aureus\" was more aggressive and not responding to the methicillin treatment provided by doctors. Throughout the years, the rate of this strain of \"S. aureus\" has continued to increase, reaching up to 60% of British hospitals, and has spread throughout the world and is not restricted to hospital settings. The source of this resistance was determined to be the mecA gene, that was acquired through a mobile genetic element, staphylococcal cassette chromosome \"mec,\" which is present in all known methicillin resistant strains of \"S. aureus\". On February 27, 2017, the World Health Organization released a list of priority bacterial resistant pathogens, naming methicillin-resistant \"S. aureus\", as a high priority target for further research and treatment development. \n\nSuccessful treatment of methicillin resistant \"S.Aureus\" begins with the detection and confirmation that the strain in question actually possesses the mecA gene, responsible for the resistance. The use of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is typically used to detect the presence of the mecA gene, alternative methods can be used as that can be as specific as PCR. Enzymatic detection PCR, which labels the PCR with enzymes, detectable by immunoabsorbant assays, takes less time, and does not require the need for gel electrophoresis, which can be costly, tedious, and unpredictable. The use of cefoxitin disc diffusion test uses phenotypic resistance to test not only for methicillin resistant strains, but also for low resistant strains also The presence of the mecA gene cannot be used on its own to determine resistant strains; further phenotypic assays of mecA positive strains, can determine the level at which the strain is resistant to methicillin. These phenotypic assays cannot rely on the accumulation of Penicillin-binding protein 2a, the protein product of the mecA gene, as a test for methicillin resistance, because there is no connection between amount of protein and resistance for this gene; the determination of level of resistance is still unknown. \n\nThe mecA gene is contained on a mobile gene element, called the staphylococcal cassette chromosome mec, from which the gene can undergo horizontal gene transfer and insert itself into the host species, which can be any species in the \"Staphylococcus\" genus. This DNA cassette is a 52 kilobase piece of DNA, that contains the mecA gene, and two recombinase genes, \"ccrA\" and \"ccrB,\" which the plasmid uses to insert itself into the genome of the host. These recombinases are essential for the proper insertion of the mecA complex into the host genome. Multiple variants of these genes have been isolated from resistant strains of \"S. aureus\", but all of the variants have similar function and the same insertion site, near the host DNA origin of replication. The mecA gene also forms a complex with two regulatory units, mecI and mecR1. These two genes have the capability to repress mecA, deletions or knock-outs in these genes show an increase in resistance of \"S. aureus\" to methicillin. The \"S. aureus\" strains isolated from humans either lack these regulatory elements, or contain mutations in these genes that cause a loss of function of the protein products that inhibit mecA. This in turn, causes mecA to be constitutive transcription of the mecA. This cassette chromosome shows the ability to move across species. Two other \"Staphylococci\" species, \"S.epidermidis\" and \"S.haemolyticus,\" show conservation in this insertion site, but it is not limited to the mecA gene, but also other non-essential genes that can be carried by the cassette chromosome.\n\nPenecillin, its derivatives and methicilin, are beta-lactams that all work by disrupting the mechanical structure of the bacterial cell well by reacting with the cell wall forming penicillin-binding protein family (PBP 1,2, 3 and 4), causing the cytoplasm to leak and the cell to die. However, the mecA gene codes for PBP2a, that has a lower affinity for antibiotic drugs, which keeps the structural integrity of the cell wall, preventing cell death. The synthesis of the bacterial cell wall in \"S. aureus\" is dependent on transglycosylation, to form linear polymer of sugar monomers, and transpeptidation, to form a interlinking peptides to strengthen the newly developed cell wall. PBPs have a transpeptidase domain, but transglycosylation was thought to only be carried out by monofunctional enzymes, however PBP2 has domains to carry out both essential processes. When antibiotics are introduced to the medium, they bind to the transpetidation domain and inhibit the ability of PBPs to cross-link muropeptides therefore preventing the formation of stable cell wall. but in a cooperative action, PBP2a lacks the proper receptor for the antibiotics, continuing the transpeptidation, preventing the breakdown of the cell wall. The functionality of PBP2a is dependent on two structural factors on the cell wall of \"S. aureus.\" First, there in order for PBP2a to properly fit onto the cell wall, to continue transpeptidation, requires proper amino acid residues, specifically a pentaglycine residue and an amidated glutamate residue. Furthermore, PBP2a has an effective transpeptidase activity, but lacks a transglycosylation domain of PBP2, which builds the backbone of the cell wall with polysaccharide monomers, and so PBP2a must rely on PBP2 to continue this process. The latter of these factors is an enzymatic reaction that can be targeted to improve the ability of beta-lactams to prevent cell wall synthesis in resistant \"S.\" aureus. Identification of genetic inhibitors of glycosylases involved in the cell wall synthesis, and modulating the expression of these inhibitors can resensitize these previously resistant bacteria to beta-lactam treatment. for example, Epicatechin gallate, a compound found in green tea, has shown signs of lowering the resistance to beta-lactams, to the point where oxacillin becomes effective to inhibit the formation of the cell wall, by inhibiting PBP2 and PBP2a. \n\nEvidence has also show that interactions with other genes have been identified to decrease resistance to beta-lactams in resistant strains of \"S. aureus\". The gene networks have been identified, are mainly involved in cell division, and cell wall synthesis and function, where there PBP2a localizes. Furthermore, PBP2a is not the only protein from the PBP family to affect the resistance of \"S. aureus\" to antibiotics. PBP4 showed a to be helpful in maintaining oxacillin resistance, as oxacillin resistance was lowered in \"S. aureus\" strains when expression of both PBP4 was inhibited but PBP2a was not.\n\nThe mecA gene is acquired and transmitted through a mobile genetic element, that inserts itself into the host genome. Evidence shows that there is a conservation of structure between the mecA gene product and a homologous mecA gene product in the bacteria\"Staphylococcus sciuri\". currently, there is no known function for the mecA homologue in \"S. sciuri\" but the evidence at the point towards these gene as being a precursor for the mecA gene found in \"S. aureus\". Furthermore, the structure of the protein product of this homologue is so similiar that it can be used in \"S. aureus.\" When the mecA homologue of beta lactam resistant \"S. sciuri\" is inserted into antibiotic sensitive \"S. aureus,\" there is an increase in the resistance to antibiotics. Even though there is a difference in the muropeptides that both species use, the protein product of the \"S. sciuri\" mecA gene is still able to continue cell wall synthesis when the PBP protein family is inhibited by a beta lactam. In order to further understand the origin of the mecA gene, specifically the mecA complex found on the Staphylococcal cassette chromosome, researchers used the mecA gene from \"S. sciuri\", in comparison to other \"Staphylococci\" species. After nucleotide analysis, the sequence of the mecA gene is almost identical to the mecA homologue found in \"Staphylococcus fleurettii,\" the most significant candidate for the origin of the mecA gene on the staphylococcal cassette chromosome. Since this gene is contained in the genome of \"S. fleurettii\", there is no way to justify this species to create the cassette chromosome. \n", "id": "19372852", "title": "MecA (gene)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19525882", "text": "Osmoprotectant\n\nOsmoprotectants or compatible solutes are small organic molecules with neutral charge and low toxicity at high concentrations that act as osmolytes and help organisms survive extreme osmotic stress. Osmoprotectants can be placed in three chemical classes: betaines and associated molecules, sugars and polyols, and amino acids.These molecules accumulate in cells and balance the osmotic difference between the cell's surroundings and the cytosol. In plants, their accumulation can increase survival during stresses such as drought. In extreme cases, such as in bdelloid rotifers, tardigrades, brine shrimp, and nematodes, these molecules can allow cells to survive being completely dried out and let them enter a state of suspended animation called cryptobiosis.\n\nIntercellular osmoprotectant concentrations are regulated in response to environmental conditions such as osmolarity and temperature via regulation of specific transcription factors and transporters. They have been shown to play a protective role by maintaining enzyme activity through freeze-thaw cycles and at higher temperatures. It is currently believed that they function by stabilizing protein structures by promoting preferential exclusion from the water layers on the surface of hydrated proteins. This favors the native conformation and displaces inorganic salts that would otherwise cause misfolding.\n\nRole of Osmoprotectants\n\nCompatible solutes have a functional role in agriculture. In high stress conditions such as drought or high salinity plants that naturally create or take up osmoprotectants show increased survival rates. By inducing expression or uptake of these molecules in crops in which they are naturally not present, there is an increase in the areas in which they are able to be grown. One documented reason for increased growth is regulation of toxic reactive oxygen species (ROS). In high salinity ROS production is stimulated by the photosystems of the plant. Osmoprotectants can prevent the photosystem-salt interactions, reducing ROS production. For these reasons, introduction of biosynthetic pathways which result in the creation of osmoprotectants in crops is a current area of research, but inducing expression at significant amounts is currently posing a barrier in this area of research.\n\nOsmoprotectants are also important for the maintenance of top soil bacteria populations. Desiccation of top soils results in increased salinity. In these situations, the soil microbes increase the concentration of these molecule in their cytoplasm in to the molar range allowing them to persist until conditions approve. In Extreme cases, osmoprotectants allow cells to enter cryptobiosis. In this state the cytosol and osmoprotectants become a glass-like solid that helps stabilize proteins and cell membranes from the damaging effects of desiccation.\n\nAdditionally, osmoprotectants provide a method to regulate gene expression in response to environmental osmolarity. The presence of compatible solutes even in small concentrations has been shown to affect gene expression. Their affect ranges from inducing production of more compatible solutes to regulating components involved in infection, such as Phospholipase C in Pseudomonas aeruginosa.\n\n", "id": "19525882", "title": "Osmoprotectant"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7634665", "text": "Translational efficiency\n\nTranslational efficiency or Translation efficiency, in the context of cell biology, is the rate of mRNA translation into proteins within cells.\n\nIt has been measured in protein per mRNA per hour. Several RNA elements within mRNAs have been shown to affect the rate. These include miRNA and protein binding sites. RNA structure may also affect translational efficiency through the altered protein or microRNA binding.\n\n", "id": "7634665", "title": "Translational efficiency"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10603702", "text": "Locus of enterocyte effacement\n\nThe locus of enterocyte effacement (LEE) is a moderately conserved pathogenicity island consisting of 35,000 base pairs in the bacteria \"Escherichia coli\" genome. The LEE encodes the Type III secretion system and associated chaperones and effector proteins responsible for attaching and effacing (AE) lesions in the large intestine. These proteins include intimin, Tir, EspC, EspF, EspH, and Map protein. The LEE has a 38% G+C ratio.\n", "id": "10603702", "title": "Locus of enterocyte effacement"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7188879", "text": "Immortal DNA strand hypothesis\n\nThe immortal DNA strand hypothesis was proposed in 1975 by John Cairns as a mechanism for adult stem cells to minimize mutations in their genomes. This hypothesis proposes that instead of segregating their DNA during mitosis in a random manner, adult stem cells divide their DNA asymmetrically, and retain a distinct template set of DNA strands (parental strands) in each division. By retaining the same set of template DNA strands, adult stem cells would pass mutations arising from errors in DNA replication on to non-stem cell daughters that soon terminally differentiate (end mitotic divisions and become a functional cell). Passing on these replication errors would allow adult stem cells to reduce their rate of accumulation of mutations that could lead to serious genetic disorders such as cancer.\n\nAlthough evidence for this mechanism exists, whether it is a mechanism acting in adult stem cells in vivo is still controversial.\n\nTwo main assays are used to detect immortal DNA strand segregation: label-retention and label-release pulse/chase assays.\n\nIn the label-retention assay, the goal is to mark 'immortal' or parental DNA strands with a DNA label such as tritiated thymidine or bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU). These types of DNA labels will incorporate into the newly synthesized DNA of dividing cells during S phase. A pulse of DNA label is given to adult stem cells under conditions where they have not yet delineated an immortal DNA strand. During these conditions, the adult stem cells are either dividing \"symmetrically\" (thus with each division a new 'immortal' strand is determined and in at least one of the stem cells the immortal DNA strand will be marked with DNA label), or the adult stem cells have \"not yet been determined\" (thus their precursors are dividing symmetrically, and once they differentiate into adult stem cells and choose an 'immortal' strand, the 'immortal strand' will already have been marked). Experimentally, adult stem cells are undergoing symmetric divisions during growth and after wound healing, and are not yet determined at neonatal stages. Once the immortal DNA strand is labelled and the adult stem cell has begun or resumed asymmetric divisions, the DNA label is chased out. In symmetric divisions (most mitotic cells), DNA is segregating randomly and the DNA label will be diluted out to levels below detection after five divisions. If, however, cells are using an immortal DNA strand mechanism, then all the labeled DNA will continue to co-segregate with the adult stem cell, and after five (or more) divisions will still be detected within the adult stem cell. These cells are sometimes called label-retaining cells (LRCs).\n\nIn the label-release assay, the goal is to mark the newly synthesized DNA that is normally passed on to the daughter (non-stem) cell. A pulse of DNA label is given to adult stem cells under conditions where they are dividing \"asymmetrically.\" Under conditions of homeostasis, adult stem cells should be dividing asymmetrically so that the same number of adult stem cells is maintained in the tissue compartment. After pulsing for long enough to label all the newly replicated DNA, the DNA label is chased out (each DNA replication now incorporates unlabeled nucleotides) and the adult stem cells are assayed for loss of the DNA label after two cell divisions. If cells are using a random segregation mechanism, then enough DNA label should remain in the cell to be detected. If, however, the adult stem cells are using an immortal DNA strand mechanism, they are obligated to retain the unlabeled 'immortal' DNA, and will release all the newly synthesized labeled DNA to their differentiating daughter cells in two divisions.\n\nSome scientists have combined the two approaches, by first using one DNA label to label the immortal strands, allowing to adult stem cells to begin dividing asymmetrically, and then using a different DNA label to label the newly synthesized DNA. Thus, the adult stem cells will retain one DNA label and release the other within two divisions.\n\nEvidence for the immortal DNA strand hypothesis has been found in various systems. One of the earliest studies by Karl Lark \"et al.\" demonstrated co-segregation of DNA in the cells of plant root tips. Plant root tips labeled with tritiated thymidine tended to segregate their labeled DNA to the same daughter cell. Though not all the labeled DNA segregated to the same daughter, the amount of thymidine-labeled DNA seen in the daughter with less label corresponded to the amount that would have arisen from sister-chromatid exchange. Later studies by Christopher Potten \"et al.\" (2002), using pulse/chase experiments with tritiated thymidine, found long-term label-retaining cells in the small intestinal crypts of neonatal mice. These researchers hypothesized that long-term incorporation of tritiated thymidine occurred because neonatal mice have undeveloped small intestines, and that pulsing tritiated thymidine soon after the birth of the mice allowed the 'immortal' DNA of adult stem cells to be labeled during their formation. These long-term cells were demonstrated to be actively cycling, as demonstrated by incorporation and release of BrdU.\n\nSince these cells were cycling but continued to contain the BrdU label in their DNA, the researchers reasoned that they must be segregating their DNA using an immortal DNA strand mechanism. Joshua Merok \"et al.\" from the lab of James Sherley engineered mammalian cells with an inducible p53 gene that controls asymmetric divisions. BrdU pulse/chase experiments with these cells demonstrated that chromosomes segregated non-randomly only when the cells were induced to divide asymmetrically like adult stem cells. These asymmetrically dividing cells provide an \"in vitro\" model for demonstration and investigation of immortal strand mechanisms. \n\nScientists have strived to demonstrate that this immortal DNA strand mechanism exists \"in vivo\" in other types of adult stem cells. In 2005, Gilbert Smith published evidence that a subset of mouse mammary epithelial cells could retain DNA label and release DNA label in a manner consistent with the immortal DNA strand mechanism. Soon after, scientists from the laboratory of Derek van der Kooy showed that mice have neural stem cells that are BrdU-retaining and continue to be mitotically active. Asymmetric segregation of DNA was shown using real-time imaging of cells in culture. In 2006, scientists in the lab of Shahragim Tajbakhsh presented evidence that muscle satellite cells, which are proposed to be adult stem cells of the skeletal muscle compartment, exhibited asymmetric segregation of BrdU-labelled DNA when put into culture. They also had evidence that demonstrated BrdU release kinetics consistent with an immortal DNA strand mechanism were operating \"in vivo\", using juvenile mice and mice with muscle regeneration induced by freezing.\n\nThese experiments supporting the immortal strand hypothesis, however, are not conclusive. While the Lark experiments demonstrated co-segregation, the co-segregation may have been an artifact of radiation from the tritium. Although Potten identified the cycling, label-retaining cells as adult stem cells, these cells are difficult to identify unequivocally as adult stem cells. While the engineered cells provide an elegant model for co-segregation of chromosomes, studies with these cells were done \"in vitro\" with engineered cells. Some features may not be present \"in vivo\" or may be absent \"in vitro\". In May 2007 evidence in support of the Immortal DNA Strand theory was discovered by Michael Conboy et al., using the muscle stem/satellite cell model during tissue regeneration, where there is tremendous cell division during a relatively brief period of time. Using two BrdU analogs to label template and newly synthesized DNA strands, they saw that about half of the dividing cells in regenerating muscle sort the older \"Immortal\" DNA to one daughter cell and the younger DNA to the other. In keeping with the stem cell hypothesis, the more undifferentiated daughter typically inherited the chromatids with the older DNA, while the more differentiated daughter inherited the younger DNA.\n\nExperimental evidence against the immortal strand hypothesis is sparse. In one study, researchers incorporated tritiated thymidine into dividing murine epidermal basal cells. They followed the release of tritiated thymidine after various chase periods, but the pattern of release was not consistent with the immortal strand hypothesis. Although they found label-retaining cells, they were not within the putative stem cell compartment. With increasing lengths of time for the chase periods, these label-retaining cells were located farther from the putative stem cell compartment, suggesting that the label-retaining cells had moved. However, finding conclusive evidence against the immortal strand hypothesis has proven difficult.\n\nAfter Cairns first proposed the immortal DNA strand mechanism, the theory has undergone several refinements.\n\nIn 2002, he proposed that in addition to using immortal DNA strand mechanisms to segregate DNA, when the immortal DNA strands of adult stem cells undergo damage, they will choose to die (apoptose) rather than use DNA repair mechanisms that are normally used in non-stem cells. \nEmmanuel David Tannenbaum and James Sherley developed a quantitative model describing how repair of point mutations might differ in adult stem cells. They found that in adult stem cells, repair was most efficient if they used an immortal DNA strand mechanism for segregating DNA, rather than a random segregation mechanism. This method would be beneficial because it avoids wrongly fixing DNA mutations in both DNA strands and propagating the mutation.\n\nThe complete proof of a concept generally requires a plausible mechanism that could mediate the effect. Although controversial, there is a suggestion that this could be provided by the Dynein Motor. This paper is accompanied by a comment summarizing the findings and background Available free online\n\nHowever, this work has highly respected biologists among its detractors as exemplified by a further comment on a paper by the same authors from 2006. Available free online. But please also see the authors rebuttal of the criticism Available free online.\n", "id": "7188879", "title": "Immortal DNA strand hypothesis"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6852602", "text": "Hormonal imprinting\n\nHormonal imprinting (HI) is a phenomenon which takes place at the first encounter between a hormone and its developing receptor in the critical periods of life (in unicellulars during the whole life) and determines the later signal transduction capacity of the cell. The most important period in mammals is the perinatal one, however this system can be imprinted at weaning, at puberty and in case of continuously dividing cells during the whole life. Faulty imprinting is caused by drugs, environmental pollutants and other hormone-like molecules present in excess at the critical periods with lifelong receptorial, morphological, biochemical and behavioral consequences. HI is transmitted to the hundreds of progeny generations in unicellulars and (as proved) to a few generations also in mammals.\n\n\n", "id": "6852602", "title": "Hormonal imprinting"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58894", "text": "Phosphorylation\n\nPhosphorylation allows coupling and addition of a phosphoryl group. This particular biochemistry probably represents the origins of catecholamine overload (PO) to a molecule. In biology, phosphorylation and its counterpart, dephosphorylation, are critical for many cellular processes. A large fraction of proteins (between 1/3 to 2/3 of the proteome in eukaryotes) are temporarily phosphorylated, as are many sugars, lipids, and other molecules. Phosphorylation is especially important for protein function as this modification activates (or deactivates) almost half of the enzymes, thereby regulating their function. Protein phosphorylation is considered the most abundant post-translational modification in eukaryotes. Phosphorylation can occur on Serine, Threonine and Tyrosine side chains (often called 'residues') through phosphoester bond formation, on Histidine, Lysine and Arginine through phosphoramidate bonds, and on Aspartic Acid and Glutamic Acid through mixed anhydride linkages. Recent evidence confirms widespread Histidine phosphorylation at both the 1 and 3 N-atoms of the imidazole ring Recent work from 2017 (preprinted at BioRxiv) suggests widespread human protein phosphorylation on multiple non-canonical amino acids, including motifs containing phosphorylated histidine, aspartate, glutamate, arginine and lysine in HeLa cell extracts. Due to the chemical lability of these phosphorylated residues, and in marked contrast to Ser, Thr and Tyr phosphorylation, the analysis of phosphorylated Histidine using standard biochemical and mass spectrometric approaches is much more challenging and special procedures and separation techniques are required for their preservation alongside classical Ser, Thr and Tyr phosphorylation.\n\nThe prominent role of protein phosphorylation in biochemistry is illustrated by the huge body of studies published on the subject (as of March 2015, the MEDLINE database returns over 240,000 articles, mostly on \"protein\" phosphorylation).\n\nPhosphorylation of sugars is often the first stage of their catabolism. It allows cells to accumulate sugars because the phosphate group prevents the molecules from diffusing back across their transporter. Phosphorylation of glucose is a key reaction in sugar metabolism because many sugars are first converted to glucose before they are metabolized further.\n\nThe chemical equation for the conversion of D-glucose to D-glucose-6-phosphate in the first step of glycolysis is given by\n\nResearcher D. G. Walker of the University of Birmingham determined the presence of two specific enzymes in adult guinea pig liver, both of which catalyze the phosphorylation of glucose to glucose 6 phosphate. The two enzymes have been identified as a specific glucokinase (ATP-D-glucose 6-phosphotransferase) and non-specific hexokinase (ATP-D-hexose 6-phosphotransferase).\n\nHepatic cell is freely permeable to glucose, and the initial rate of phosphorylation of glucose is the rate-limiting step in glucose metabolism by the liver (ATP-D-glucose 6-phosphotransferase) and non-specific hexokinase (ATP-D-hexose 6-phosphotransferase).\n\nThe role of glucose 6-phosphate in glycogen synthase: High blood glucose concentration causes an increase in intracellular levels of glucose 6 phosphate in liver, skeletal muscle and fat (adipose) tissue. (ATP-D-glucose 6-phosphotransferase) and non-specific hexokinase (ATP-D-hexose 6-phosphotransferase). In liver, synthesis of glycogen is directly correlated by blood glucose concentration and in skeletal muscle and adipocytes, glucose has a minor effect on glycogen synthase. High blood glucose releases insulin, stimulating the trans location of specific glucose transporters to the cell membrane.\n\nThe liver’s crucial role in controlling blood sugar concentrations by breaking down glucose into carbon dioxide and glycogen is characterized by the negative delta G value, which indicates that this is a point of regulation with. The hexokinase enzyme has a low Km, indicating a high affinity for glucose, so this initial phosphorylation can proceed even when glucose levels at nanoscopic scale within the blood.\n\nThe phosphorylation of glucose can be enhanced by the binding of Fructose-6-phosphate, and lessened by the binding fructose-1-phosphate. Fructose consumed in the diet is converted to F1P in the liver. This negates the action of F6P on glucokinase, which ultimately favors the forward reaction. The capacity of liver cells to phosphorylate fructose exceeds capacity of metabolize fructose-1-phosphate. Consuming excess fructose ultimately results in an imbalance in liver metabolism, which indirectly exhausts the liver cell’s supply of ATP.\n\nAllosteric activation by glucose 6 phosphate, which acts as an effector, stimulates glycogen synthase, and glucose 6 phosphate may inhibit the phosphorylation of glycogen synthase by cyclic AMP-stimulated protein kinase.\n\nPhosphorylation of glucose is imperative in processes within the body. For example, phosphorylating glucose is necessary for insulin-dependent mechanistic target of rapamycin pathway activity within the heart. This further suggests a link between intermediary metabolism and cardiac growth.\n\nReversible phosphorylation of proteins is an important regulatory mechanism that occurs in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms.\nIt is estimated that 230,000, 156,000 and 40,000 phosphorylation sites exist in human, mouse and yeast, respectively. Kinases phosphorylate proteins and phosphatases dephosphorylate proteins. Many enzymes and receptors are switched \"on\" or \"off\" by phosphorylation and dephosphorylation. Reversible phosphorylation results in a conformational change in the structure in many enzymes and receptors, causing them to become activated or deactivated. Phosphorylation usually occurs on serine, threonine, tyrosine and histidine residues in eukaryotic proteins. Histidine phosphorylation of eukaryotic proteins appears to be much more frequent than tyrosine phosphorylation. In prokaryotic proteins phosphorylation occurs on the serine, threonine, tyrosine, histidine or arginine or lysine residues. The addition of a phosphate (PO) molecule to a non-polar R group of an amino acid residue can turn a hydrophobic portion of a protein into a polar and extremely hydrophilic portion of a molecule. In this way protein dynamics can induce a conformational change in the structure of the protein via long-range allostery with other hydrophobic and hydrophilic residues in the protein.\n\nOne such example of the regulatory role that phosphorylation plays is the p53 tumor suppressor protein. The p53 protein is heavily regulated and contains more than 18 different phosphorylation sites. Activation of p53 can lead to cell cycle arrest, which can be reversed under some circumstances, or apoptotic cell death. This activity occurs only in situations wherein the cell is damaged or physiology is disturbed in normal healthy individuals.\n\nUpon the deactivating signal, the protein becomes dephosphorylated again and stops working. This is the mechanism in many forms of signal transduction, for example the way in which incoming light is processed in the light-sensitive cells of the retina.\n\nRegulatory roles of phosphorylation include\nGlycolysis is an essential process of glucose degrading into two molecules of pyruvate, through various steps, with the help of different enzymes. It occurs in ten steps and proves that phosphorylation is a much required and necessary step to attain the end products. Phosphorylation initiates the reaction in step 1 of the preparatory step (first half of glycolysis), and initiates step 6 of payoff phase (second phase of glycolysis).\n\nGlucose, by nature, is a small molecule with the ability to diffuse in and out of the cell. By phosphorylating glucose (adding a negatively charged phosphate group), glucose is converted to glucose-6-phosphate and trapped within the cell as the cell membrane is negatively charged. This reaction occurs due to the enzyme hexokinase, an enzyme that helps phosphorylate many six-membered ring structures. Glucose-6-phosphate cannot travel through the cell membrane and is therefore, coerced to stay inside the cell. Phosphorylation takes place in step 3, where fructose-6-phosphate is converted to fructose-1,6-bisphosphate. This reaction is catalyzed by phosphofructokinase.\n\nWhile phosphorylation is performed by ATPs during preparatory steps, phosphorylation during payoff phase is maintained by inorganic phosphate. Each molecule of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate is phosphorylated to form 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate. This reaction is catalyzed by GAPDH (glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase). The cascade effect of phosphorylation eventually causes instability and allows enzymes to open the carbon bonds in glucose.\n\nPhosphorylation functions as an extremely vital component of glycolysis, for it helps in transport, control and efficiency.\n\nElucidating complex signaling pathway phosphorylation events can be difficult. In cellular signaling pathways, protein A phosphorylates protein B, and B phosphorylates C. However, in another signaling pathway, protein D phosphorylates A, or phosphorylates protein C. Global approaches such as phosphoproteomics, the study of phosphorylated proteins, which is a sub-branch of proteomics, combined with mass spectrometry-based proteomics, have been utilised to identify and quantify dynamic changes in phosphorylated proteins over time. These techniques are becoming increasingly important for the systematic analysis of complex phosphorylation networks. They have been successfully used to identify dynamic changes in the phosphorylation status of more than 6000 sites after stimulation with epidermal growth factor. Another approach for understanding Phosphorylation Network, is by measuring the genetic interactions between multiple phosphorylating proteins and their targets. This reveals interesting recurring patterns of interactions – network motifs. Computational methods have been developed to model phosphorylation networks and predict their responses under different perturbations.\n\nWithin a protein, phosphorylation can occur on several amino acids. Phosphorylation on serine is thought to be the most common, followed by threonine. Tyrosine phosphorylation is relatively rare but lies at the head of many protein phosphorylation signalling pathways (e.g. in tyrosine kinase-linked receptors) in most of the eukaryotes. Phosphorylation on amino acids, such as serine, threonine, and tyrosine results in the formation of a phosphoprotein, when the phosphate group of the phosphoprotein reacts with the -OH group of a Ser, Thr, or Tyr sidechain in an esterification reaction. However, since tyrosine phosphorylated proteins are relatively easy to purify using antibodies, tyrosine phosphorylation sites are relatively well understood. Histidine and aspartate phosphorylation occurs in prokaryotes as part of two-component signaling and in some cases in eukaryotes in some signal transduction pathways.The analysis of phosphorylated Histidine using standard biochemical and mass spectrometric approaches is much more challenging than that of Ser, Thr or Tyr. and In prokaryotes, archea, and some lower eukaryotes histidine's nitrogen act as a nucleophile and binds to a phosphate group. Once histidine is phosphorylated the regulatory domain of the response regulator catalyzes the transfer of the phosphate to aspartate.\n\nEukaryotic DNA is organized with histone proteins in specific complexes called chromatin. The chromatin structure functions and facilitates the packaging, organization and distribution of eukaryotic DNA. However, it has a negative impact on several fundamental biological processes such as transcription, replication and DNA repair by restricting the accessibility of certain enzymes and proteins. Post-translational modification of histones such as histone phosphorylation has been shown to modify the chromatin structure by changing protein:DNA or protein:protein interactions. Histone post-translational modifications modify the chromatin structure. The most commonly associated histone phosphorylation occurs during cellular responses to DNA damage, when phosphorylated histone H2A separates large chromatin domains around the site of DNA breakage. Researchers investigated whether modifications of histones directly impact RNA polymerase II directed transcription. Researchers choose proteins that are known to modify histones to test their effects on transcription, and found that the stress-induced kinase, MSK1, inhibits RNA synthesis. Inhibition of transcription by MSK1 was most sensitive when the template was in chromatin, since DNA templates not in chromatin were resistant to the effects of MSK1. It was shown that MSK1 phosphorylated histone H2A on serine 1, and mutation of serine 1 to alanine blocked the inhibition of transcription by MSK1. Thus results suggested that the acetylation of histones can stimulate transcription by suppressing an inhibitory phosphorylation by a kinase as MSK1.\n\nAntibodies can be used as powerful tool to detect whether a protein is phosphorylated at a particular site. Antibodies bind to and detect phosphorylation-induced conformational changes in the protein. Such antibodies are called phospho-specific antibodies; hundreds of such antibodies are now available. They are becoming critical reagents both for basic research and for clinical diagnosis.\n\nPosttranslational modification (PTM) isoforms are easily detected on 2D gels. Indeed, phosphorylation replaces neutral hydroxyl groups on serines, threonines, or tyrosines with negatively charged phosphates with pKs near 1.2 and 6.5. Thus, below pH 5.5, phosphates add a single negative charge; near pH 6.5, they add 1.5 negative charges; above pH 7.5, they add 2 negative charges. The relative amount of each isoform can also easily and rapidly be determined from staining intensity on 2D gels.\n\nIn some very specific cases, the detection of the phosphorylation as a shift in the protein's electrophoretic mobility is possible on simple 1-dimensional SDS-PAGE gels, as it's described for instance for a transcriptional coactivator by Kovacs et al. Strong phosphorylation-related conformational changes (that persist in detergent-containing solutions) are thought to underlie this phenomenon. Most of the phosphorylation sites for which such a mobility shift has been described fall in the category of SP and TP sites (i.e. a proline residue follows the phosphorylated serine or threonine residue).\n\nMore recently large-scale mass spectrometry analyses have been used to determine sites of protein phosphorylation. Over the last 4 years, dozens of studies have been published, each identifying thousands of sites, many of which were previously undescribed. Mass spectrometry is ideally suited for such analyses using HCD or ETD fragmentation, as the addition of phosphorylation results in an increase in the mass of the protein and the phosphorylated residue. Advanced, highly accurate mass spectrometers are needed for these studies, limiting the technology to labs with high-end mass spectrometers. However, the analysis of phosphorylated peptides by mass spectrometry is still not as straightforward as for “regular”, unmodified peptides. Recently EThcD has been developed combining electron-transfer and higher-energy collision dissociation. Compared to the usual fragmentation methods, EThcD scheme provides more informative MS/MS spectra for unambiguous phosphosite localization.\n\nA detailed characterization of the sites of phosphorylation is very difficult, and the quantitation of protein phosphorylation by mass spectrometry requires isotopic internal standard approaches. A relative quantitation can be obtained with a variety of differential isotope labeling technologies. There are also several quantitative protein phosphorylation methods, including fluorescence immunoassays, Microscale thermophoresis, FRET, TRF, fluorescence polarization, fluorescence-quenching, mobility shift, bead-based detection, and cell-based formats.\n\nATP, the \"high-energy\" exchange medium in the cell, is synthesized in the mitochondrion by addition of a third phosphate group to ADP in a process referred to as oxidative phosphorylation. ATP is also synthesized by substrate-level phosphorylation during glycolysis.\nATP is synthesized at the expense of solar energy by photophosphorylation in the chloroplasts of plant cells.\n\n\n", "id": "58894", "title": "Phosphorylation"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20015565", "text": "Autoinducer-2\n\nAutoinducer-2 (AI-2), a furanosyl borate diester, is a member of a family of signaling molecules used in quorum sensing. AI-2 is one of only a few known biomolecules incorporating boron. First identified in the marine bacterium \"Vibrio harveyi\", AI-2 is produced and recognized by many Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria. AI-2 arises by the reaction of 1-deoxy-3-dehydro-D-ribulose, which is produced enzymatically, with boric acid and is recognized by the two-component sensor kinase LuxPQ in Vibrionaceae.\n\nAI-2 is actively transported by the Lsr ABC-type transporter into the cell in Enterobacteriaceae and few other bacterial taxa (\"Pasteurella\", \"Photorhabdus\", \"Haemophilus\", \"Bacillus\"), where it is phosphorylated by . Then, Phospho-AI-2 binds the transcriptional repressor protein, LsrR, which subsequently is released from the promoter/operator region of the lsr operon – and transcription of the \"lsr\" genes is initiated. AI-2 signalling is also regulated by glucose and cAMP/CRP via the \"lsr\" operon. In the presence of glucose, low levels of cAMP/CRP result in almost no \"lsr\" operon (\"lsrABCDFG\") expression. Without glucose, cAMP-CRP is needed to stimulate the \"lsr\" expression, while LsrR represses its expression in the absence of the inducer, phospho-AI-2. As AI-2 accumulates, more AI-2 is taken in via LsrABCD, phosphorylated via LsrK, and the \"lsr\" transcription is de-repressed, enabling even more AI-2 uptake.\n\nDoubts have been expressed regarding AI-2's status as a universal signal. Although the \"luxS\" gene, which encodes the protein responsible for AI-2 production is widespread, the latter has mainly a primary metabolic role in the recycling of S-adenosyl-L-methionine, with AI-2 being a by-product of that process. An unequivocally AI-2 related behavior was found to be restricted primarily to organisms bearing known AI-2 receptor genes. Thus, while it is certainly true that some bacteria respond to AI-2, it is doubtful that it is always being produced for purposes of signaling.\n", "id": "20015565", "title": "Autoinducer-2"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=534001", "text": "Secretion\n\nSecretion is the movement of material from one point to another, e.g. secreted chemical substance from a cell or gland. In contrast, excretion, is the removal of certain substances or waste products from a cell or organism. The classical mechanism of cell secretion is via secretory portals at the cell plasma membrane called porosomes. Porosomes are permanent cup-shaped lipoprotein structure at the cell plasma membrane, where secretory vesicles transiently dock and fuse to release intra-vesicular contents from the cell.\n\nSecretion in bacterial species means the transport or translocation of effector molecules for example: proteins, enzymes or toxins (such as cholera toxin in pathogenic bacteria for example \"Vibrio cholerae\") from across the interior (cytoplasm or cytosol) of a bacterial cell to its exterior. Secretion is a very important mechanism in bacterial functioning and operation in their natural surrounding environment for adaptation and survival.\n\nEukaryotic cells, including human cells, have a highly evolved process of secretion. Proteins targeted for the outside are synthesized by ribosomes docked to the rough endoplasmic reticulum (ER). As they are synthesized, these proteins translocate into the ER lumen, where they are glycosylated and where molecular chaperones aid protein folding. Misfolded proteins are usually identified here and retrotranslocated by ER-associated degradation to the cytosol, where they are degraded by a proteasome. The vesicles containing the properly folded proteins then enter the Golgi apparatus.\n\nIn the Golgi apparatus, the glycosylation of the proteins is modified and further posttranslational modifications, including cleavage and functionalization, may occur. The proteins are then moved into secretory vesicles which travel along the cytoskeleton to the edge of the cell. More modification can occur in the secretory vesicles (for example insulin is cleaved from proinsulin in the secretory vesicles).\n\nEventually, there is vesicle fusion with the cell membrane at a structure called the porosome, in a process called exocytosis, dumping its contents out of the cell's environment.\n\nStrict biochemical control is maintained over this sequence by usage of a pH gradient: the pH of the cytosol is 7.4, the ER's pH is 7.0, and the cis-golgi has a pH of 6.5. Secretory vesicles have pHs ranging between 5.0 and 6.0; some secretory vesicles evolve into lysosomes, which have a pH of 4.8.\n\nThere are many proteins like FGF1 (aFGF), FGF2 (bFGF), interleukin-1 (IL1) etc. which do not have a signal sequence. They do not use the classical ER-golgi pathway. These are secreted through various nonclassical pathways.\n\nAt least four nonclassical (unconventional) protein secretion pathways have been described. They include 1) direct translocation of proteins across the plasma membrane likely through membrane transporters, 2) blebbing, 3) lysosomal secretion, and 4) release via exosomes derived from multivesicular bodies. In addition, proteins can be released from cells by mechanical or physiological wounding and through nonlethal, transient oncotic pores in the plasma membrane induced by washing cells with serum-free media or buffers.\n\nMany human cell types have the ability to be secretory cells. They have a well-developed endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus to fulfill their function. Tissues in humans that produce secretions include the gastrointestinal tract which secretes digestive enzymes and gastric acid, the lung which secretes surfactants, and sebaceous glands which secrete sebum to lubricate the skin and hair. Meibomian glands in the eyelid secrete sebum to lubricate and protect the eye.\n\nSecretion is not unique to eukaryotes alone - it is present in bacteria and archaea as well. ATP binding cassette (ABC) type transporters are common to all the three domains of life. The Sec system constituting the Sec Y-E-G complex (see Type II secretion system (T2SS), below) is another conserved secretion system, homologous to the translocon in the eukaryotic endoplasmic reticulum and the Sec 61 translocon complex of yeast. Some secreted proteins are translocated across the cytoplasmic membrane by the Sec translocon, which requires the presence of an N-terminal signal peptide on the secreted protein. Others are translocated across the cytoplasmic membrane by the twin-arginine translocation pathway (Tat). Gram-negative bacteria have two membranes, thus making secretion topologically more complex. There are at least six specialized secretion systems in gram-negative bacteria. Many secreted proteins are particularly important in bacterial pathogenesis.\n\nType I secretion is a chaperone dependent secretion system employing the Hly and Tol gene clusters. The process begins as a leader sequence HlyA is recognized and binds HlyB on the membrane. This signal sequence is extremely specific for the ABC transporter. The HlyAB complex stimulates HlyD which begins to uncoil and reaches the outer membrane where TolC recognizes a terminal molecule or signal on HlyD. HlyD recruits TolC to the inner membrane and HlyA is excreted outside of the outer membrane via a long-tunnel protein channel.\n\nType I secretion system transports various molecules, from ions, drugs, to proteins of various sizes (20 – 900 kDa). The molecules secreted vary in size from the small \"Escherichia coli\" peptide colicin V, (10 kDa) to the \"Pseudomonas fluorescens\" cell adhesion protein LapA of 520 kDa. The best characterized are the RTX toxins and the lipases. Type I secretion is also involved in export of non-proteinaceous substrates like cyclic β-glucans and polysaccharides.\n\nProteins secreted through the type II system, or main terminal branch of the general secretory pathway, depend on the Sec or Tat system for initial transport into the periplasm. Once there, they pass through the outer membrane via a multimeric (12–14 subunits) complex of pore forming secretin proteins. In addition to the secretin protein, 10–15 other inner and outer membrane proteins compose the full secretion apparatus, many with as yet unknown function. Gram-negative type IV pili use a modified version of the type II system for their biogenesis, and in some cases certain proteins are shared between a pilus complex and type II system within a single bacterial species.\n\nIt is homologous to the basal body in bacterial flagella. It is like a molecular syringe through which a bacterium (e.g. certain types of \"Salmonella\", \"Shigella\", \"Yersinia\", \"Vibrio\") can inject proteins into eukaryotic cells. The low Ca concentration in the cytosol opens the gate that regulates T3SS. One such mechanism to detect low calcium concentration has been illustrated by the lcrV (Low Calcium Response) antigen utilized by \"Yersinia pestis\", which is used to detect low calcium concentrations and elicits T3SS attachment. The Hrp system in plant pathogens inject harpins and pathogen effector proteins through similar mechanisms into plants. This secretion system was first discovered in \"Yersinia pestis\" and showed that toxins could be injected directly from the bacterial cytoplasm into the cytoplasm of its host's cells rather than simply be secreted into the extracellular medium.\n\nIt is homologous to conjugation machinery of bacteria. It is capable of transporting both DNA and proteins. It was discovered in \"Agrobacterium tumefaciens\", which uses this system to introduce the T-DNA portion of the Ti plasmid into the plant host, which in turn causes the affected area to develop into a crown gall (tumor). \"Helicobacter pylori\" uses a type IV secretion system to deliver CagA into gastric epithelial cells, which is associated with gastric carcinogenesis. \"Bordetella pertussis\", the causative agent of whooping cough, secretes the pertussis toxin partly through the type IV system. \"Legionella pneumophila\", the causing agent of legionellosis (Legionnaires' disease) utilizes a type IVB secretion system, known as the icm/dot (intracellular multiplication / defect in organelle trafficking genes) system, to translocate numerous effector proteins into its eukaryotic host. The prototypic Type IVA secretion system is the VirB complex of \"Agrobacterium tumefaciens\".\nProtein members of this family are components of the type IV secretion system. They mediate intracellular transfer of macromolecules via a mechanism ancestrally related to that of bacterial conjugation machineries.\n\nIn short, Type IV secretion system (T4SS), is the general mechanism by which bacterial cells secrete or take up macromolecules. Their precise mechanism remains unknown. T4SS is encoded on Gram-negative conjugative elements in bacteria.T4SS are cell envelope-spanning complexes or in other words 11–13 core proteins that form a channel through which DNA and proteins can travel from the cytoplasm of the donor cell to the cytoplasm of the recipient cell. Additionally, T4SS also secrete virulence factor proteins directly into host cells as well as taking up DNA from the medium during natural transformation, which shows the versatility of this macromolecular secretion apparatus.\n\nAs shown in the above figure, TraC, in particular consists of a three helix bundle and a loose globular appendage.\n\nT4SS has two effector proteins: firstly, ATS-1, which stands for Anaplasma translocated substrate 1, and secondly AnkA, which stands for ankyrin repeat domain-containing protein A. Additionally, T4SS coupling proteins are VirD4, which bind to VirE2.\n\nAlso called the autotransporter system, type V secretion involves use of the \"Sec\" system for crossing the inner membrane. Proteins which use this pathway have the capability to form a beta-barrel with their C-terminus which inserts into the outer membrane, allowing the rest of the peptide (the passenger domain) to reach the outside of the cell. Often, autotransporters are cleaved, leaving the beta-barrel domain in the outer membrane and freeing the passenger domain. Some researchers believe remnants of the autotransporters gave rise to the porins which form similar beta-barrel structures. A common example of an autotransporter that uses this secretion system is the Trimeric Autotransporter Adhesins.\n\nType VI secretion systems were originally identified in 2006 by the group of John Mekalanos at the Harvard Medical School (Boston, USA) in two bacterial pathogens, \"Vibrio cholerae\" and \"Pseudomonas aeruginosa\". These were identified when mutations in the Hcp and VrgG genes in \"Vibrio Cholerae\" led to decreased virulence and pathogenicity. Since then, Type VI secretion systems have been found in a quarter of all proteobacterial genomes, including animal, plant, human pathogens, as well as soil, environmental or marine bacteria. While most of the early studies of Type VI secretion focused on its role in the pathogenesis of higher organisms, more recent studies suggested a broader physiological role in defense against simple eukaryotic predators and its role in inter-bacteria interactions. The Type VI secretion system gene clusters contain from 15 to more than 20 genes, two of which, Hcp and VgrG, have been shown to be nearly universally secreted substrates of the system. Structural analysis of these and other proteins in this system bear a striking resemblance to the tail spike of the T4 phage, and the activity of the system is thought to functionally resemble phage infection.\n\nIn addition to the use of the multiprotein complexes listed above, Gram-negative bacteria possess another method for release of material: the formation of bacterial outer membrane vesicles. Portions of the outer membrane pinch off, forming nano-scale spherical structures made of a lipopolysaccharide-rich lipid bilayer enclosing periplasmic materials, and are deployed for membrane vesicle trafficking to manipulate environment or invade at host-pathogen interface. Vesicles from a number of bacterial species have been found to contain virulence factors, some have immunomodulatory effects, and some can directly adhere to and intoxicate host cells. release of vesicles has been demonstrated as a general response to stress conditions, the process of loading cargo proteins seems to be selective.\n\nIn some \"Staphylococcus\" and \"Streptococcus\" species, the accessory secretory system handles the export of highly repetitive adhesion glycoproteins.\n\n\n\n", "id": "534001", "title": "Secretion"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21104520", "text": "Celada-Seiden model\n\nIn cell biology, the Celada-Seiden model is a logical description at the inter-cellular level of the mechanisms making up the adaptive immune humoral and cellular response to a genetic antigen.\n\nThe computational counterpart of the Celada-Seiden model is the IMMSIM code.\n", "id": "21104520", "title": "Celada-Seiden model"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=842910", "text": "Ergosterol\n\nErgosterol (ergosta-5,7,22-trien-3β-ol) is a sterol found in cell membranes of fungi and protozoa, serving many of the same functions that cholesterol serves in animal cells. Because many fungi and protozoa cannot survive without ergosterol, the enzymes that create it have become important targets for drug discovery. Ergosterol is a provitamin form of vitamin D; exposure to ultraviolet (UV) light causes a chemical reaction that produces vitamin D.\n\nErgosterol (ergosta-5,7,22-trien-3β-ol) is a sterol found in fungi, and named for ergot, the common name of members of the fungal genus \"Claviceps\" from which ergosterol was first isolated. Ergosterol is a component of yeast and other fungal cell membranes, serving many of the same functions that cholesterol serves in animal cells.\nIts specificity in higher fungi is thought to be related to the climatic instabilities (highly varying humidity and moisture conditions) encountered by these organisms in their typical ecological niches (plant and animal surfaces, soil). Thus, despite the added energy requirements of ergosterol synthesis (if compared to cholesterol), ergosterol is thought to have evolved as a nearly ubiquitous, evolutionarily advantageous fungal alternative to cholesterol.\n\nBecause ergosterol is present in cell membranes of fungi, yet absent in those of animals, it is a useful target for antifungal drugs. Ergosterol is also present in the cell membranes of some protists, such as trypanosomes. This is the basis for the use of some antifungals against West African sleeping sickness.\n\nAmphotericin B, an antifungal drug, targets ergosterol. It binds physically to ergosterol within the membrane, thus creating a polar pore in fungal membranes. This causes ions (predominantly potassium and protons) and other molecules to leak out, which will kill the cell. Amphotericin B has been replaced by safer agents in most circumstances, but is still used, despite its side effects, for life-threatening fungal or protozoan infections.\n\nMiconazole, itraconazole, and clotrimazole work in a different way, inhibiting synthesis of ergosterol from lanosterol by interfering with 14α-demethylase . Ergosterol is a smaller molecule than lanosterol; it is synthesized by combining two molecules of farnesyl pyrophosphate, a 15-carbon-long terpenoid, into lanosterol, which has 30 carbons. Then, two methyl groups are removed, making ergosterol. The \"azole\" class of antifungal agents inhibit the enzyme that performs these demethylation steps in the biosynthetic pathway between lanosterol and ergosterol.\n\nSome protozoa, including \"Trichomonas\" and \"Leishmania\" are inhibited by drugs that target ergosterol synthesis and function\n\nErgosterol is a biological precursor of vitamin D, the chemical name of which is ergocalciferol. Exposure to ultraviolet light causes a photochemical reaction that converts ergosterol to ergocalciferol.\n\nThis happens naturally to a certain extent, and many mushrooms are irradiated after harvest to increase their Vitamin D content. Fungi are also grown industrially so that ergosterol can be extracted and converted to Vitamin D for sale as a dietary supplement and food additive.\n\nPreparations of irradiated ergosterol containing a mixture of previtamin and D vitamin were called Viosterol in the 1930s.\n\nErgosterol powder is an irritant to skin, eyes, and the respiratory tract. Ingestion of large amounts can cause hypercalcemia, which (if prolonged) can lead to calcium salt deposits in the soft tissues and, in particular, the kidneys.\n\n\n", "id": "842910", "title": "Ergosterol"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22267568", "text": "Acroplaxome\n\nSpermatozoa develop in the seminiferous tubules of the testes. During their development the spermatogonia proceed through meiosis to become spermatozoa. Many changes occur during this process: the DNA in nuclei becomes condensed; the acrosome develops as a structure close to the nucleus. The acrosome is derived from the Golgi apparatus and contains hydrolytic enzymes important for fusion of the spermatozoon with an egg cell. During spermiogenesis the nucleus condenses and changes shape. Abnormal shape change is a feature of sperm in male infertility.\nThe acroplaxome is a structure found between the acrosomal membrane and the nuclear membrane. The acroplaxome contains structural proteins including keratin 5, F-actin and profilin IV.\n", "id": "22267568", "title": "Acroplaxome"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5466491", "text": "Xylan\n\nXylan (CAS number: 9014-63-5) is a group of hemicelluloses that are found in plant cell walls and some algae. Xylans are polysaccharides made from units of xylose (a pentose sugar). Xylans are almost as ubiquitous as cellulose in plant cell walls and contain predominantly β-D-xylose units linked as in cellulose.\n\nTypically the content of xylans in hardwoods are 10 - 35 % of the hemicelluloses and in softwoods they are 10 - 15 % of the hemicelluloses. The main xylan component in hardwoods is O-acetyl-4-O-methylglucuronoxylan and in softwoods the main xylan components are arabino-4-O-methylglucuronoxylans. In general softwood xylans differ from hardwood xylans by the lack of acetyl groups and the presence of arabinose units linked by α-(1,3)-glycosidic bonds to the xylan backbone.\n\nSome macrophytic green algae contain xylan (specifically homoxylan) especially those within the \"Codium\" and \"Bryopsis\" genera where it replaces cellulose in the cell wall matrix. Similarly, it replaces the inner fibrillar cell-wall layer of cellulose in some red algae.\n\nXylan is one of the foremost anti-nutritional factors in common use feedstuff raw materials.\n\nXylooligosaccharides produced from xylan are considered as \"functional food\" or dietary fibers due their potential prebiotic properties . Xylan can be converted in xylooligosaccharides by chemical hydrolysis using acids or by enzymatic hydrolysis using endo-xylanases . Some enzymes from yeast can exclusively converts xylan into only xylooligosaccharides-DP-3 to 7.\n", "id": "5466491", "title": "Xylan"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22066537", "text": "Sperm guidance\n\nSperm guidance is the process by which sperm cells (spermatozoa) are directed to the oocyte (egg) for the aim of fertilization. In the case of marine invertebrates the guidance is done by chemotaxis. In the case of mammals, it appears to be done by chemotaxis, thermotaxis and rheotaxis.\n\nSince the discovery of sperm attraction to the female gametes in ferns over a century ago, sperm guidance in the form of sperm chemotaxis has been established in a large variety of species Although sperm chemotaxis is prevalent throughout the Metazoa kingdom, from marine species with external fertilization such as sea urchins and corals, to humans, much of the current information on sperm chemotaxis is derived from studies of marine invertebrates, primarily sea urchin and starfish. As a matter of fact, until not too long ago, the dogma was that, in mammals, guidance of spermatozoa to the oocyte was unnecessary. This was due to the common belief that, following ejaculation into the female genital tract, large numbers of spermatozoa 'race' towards the oocyte and compete to fertilize it. This belief was taken apart when it became clear that only few of the ejaculated spermatozoa — in humans, only ~1 of every million spermatozoa — succeed in entering the oviducts (Fallopian tubes) and when more recent studies showed that mammalian spermatozoa employ at least three different mechanisms, each of which can potentially serve as a guidance mechanism: chemotaxis, thermotaxis and rheotaxis.\n\nSperm guidance in non-mammalian species is performed by chemotaxis. The oocyte secretes a chemoattractant, which, as it diffuses away, forms a concentration gradient: a high concentration close to the egg, and a gradually lower concentration as the distance from the oocyte increases. Spermatozoa can sense this chemoattractant and orient their swimming direction up the concentration gradient towards the oocyte. Sperm chemotaxis was demonstrated in a large number of non-mammalian species, from marine invertebrates to frogs.\n\nThe sperm chemoattractants in non-mammalian species vary to a large extent. Some examples are shown in Table 1. So far, most sperm chemoattractants that have been identified in non-mammalian species are peptides or low-molecular-weight proteins (1–20 kDa), which are heat stable and sensitive to proteases. Exceptions to this rule are the sperm chemoattractants of corals, ascidians, plants such as ferns, and algae (Table 1).\n\n\nThe variety of chemoattractants raises the question of species specificity with respect to the chemoattractant identity. There is no single rule for chemoattractant-related specificity. Thus, in some groups of marine invertebrates (e.g., hydromedusae and certain ophiuroids), the specificity is very high; in others (e.g., starfish), the specificity is at the family level and, within the family, there is no specificity. In mollusks, there appears to be no specificity at all. Likewise, in plants, a unique simple compound [e.g., fucoserratene — a linear, unsaturated alkene (1,3-trans 5-cis-octatriene)] might be a chemoattractant for various species.\n\nHere, too, there is no single rule. In some species (for example, in hydroids like \"Campanularia\" or tunicate like \"Ciona\"), the swimming direction of the spermatozoa changes abruptly towards the chemoattractant source. In others (for example, in sea urchin, hydromedusa, fern, or fish such as Japanese bitterlings), the approach to the chemoattractant source is indirect and the movement is by repetitive loops of small radii. In some species (for example, herring or the ascidian Ciona) activation of motility precedes chemotaxis. In chemotaxis, cells may either sense a temporal gradient of the chemoattractant, comparing the occupancy of its receptors at different time points (as do bacteria), or they may detect a spatial gradient, comparing the occupancy of receptors at different locations along the cell (as do leukocytes). In the best-studied species, sea urchin, the spermatozoa sense a temporal gradient and respond to it with a transient increase in flagellar asymmetry. The outcome is a turn in the swimming path, followed by a period of straight swimming, leading to the observed epicycloid-like movements directed towards the chemoattractant source.\n\nThe molecular mechanism of sperm chemotaxis is still not fully known. The current knowledge is mainly based on studies in the sea urchin \"Arbacia punctulata\", where binding of the chemoattractant resact (Table 1) to its receptor, a guanylyl cyclase, activates cGMP synthesis (Figure 1). The resulting rise of cGMP possibly activates K-selective ion channels. The consequential hyperpolarization activates hyperpolarization-activated and cyclic nucleotide-gated (HCN) channels. The depolarizing inward current through HCN channels possibly activates voltage-activated Ca channels, resulting in elevation of intracellular Ca. This rise leads to flagellar asymmetry and, consequently, a turn of the sperm cell.\n\nFigure 1. A model of the signal-transduction pathway during sperm chemotaxis of the sea urchin \"Arbacia punctulata\". Binding of a chemoattractant (ligand) to the receptor — a membrane-bound guanylyl cyclase (GC) — activates the synthesis of cGMP from GTP. Cyclic GMP possibly opens cyclic nucleotide-gated (CNG) K-selective channels, thereby causing hyperpolarization of the membrane. The cGMP signal is terminated by the hydrolysis of cGMP through phosphodiesterase (PDE) activity and inactivation of GC. On hyperpolarization, hyperpolarization-activated and cyclic nucleotide-gated (HCN) channels allow the influx of Na that leads to depolarization and thereby causes a rapid Ca entry through voltage-activated Ca channels (Ca), Ca ions interact by unknown mechanisms with the axoneme of the flagellum and cause an increase of the asymmetry of flagellar beat and eventually a turn or bend in the swimming trajectory. Ca is removed from the flagellum by a Na/Ca exchange mechanism. [Taken from ref.]\n\nThree different guidance mechanisms have been proposed to occur in the mammalian oviduct: thermotaxis, rheotaxis, and chemotaxis. Indeed, due to obvious restrictions, all these mechanisms were demonstrated \"in vitro\" only. However, the discoveries of proper stimuli in the female – an ovulation-dependent temperature gradient in the oviduct, post-coitus oviductal fluid flow in female mice, and sperm chemoattractants secreted from the oocyte and its surrounding cumulus cells, respectively – strongly suggest the mutual occurrence of these mechanisms \"in vivo\". \n\nFollowing the findings that human spermatozoa accumulate in follicular fluid and that there is a remarkable correlation between this in vitro accumulation and oocyte fertilization, chemotaxis was substantiated as the cause of this accumulation. Sperm chemotaxis was later also demonstrated in mice and rabbits. In addition, sperm accumulation in follicular fluid (but without substantiating that it truly reflects chemotaxis) was demonstrated in horses and pigs. A key feature of sperm chemotaxis in humans is that this process is restricted to capacitated cells — the only cells that possess the ability to penetrate the oocyte and fertilize it. This raised the possibility that, in mammals, chemotaxis is not solely a guidance mechanism but it is also a mechanism of sperm selection. Importantly, the fraction of capacitated (and, hence, chemotactically responsive) spermatozoa is low (~10% in humans), the life span of the capacitated/chemotactic state is short (1–4 hours in humans), a spermatozoon can be at this state only once in its lifetime, and sperm individuals become capacitated/chemotactic at different time points, resulting in continuous replacement of capacitated/chemotactic cells within the sperm population, i.e., prolonged availability of capacitated cells. These sperm features raised the possibility that prolonging the time period, during which capacitated spermatozoa can be found in the female genital tract, is a mechanism, evolved in humans, to compensate for the lack of coordination between insemination and ovulation.\n\nIt should be noted that chemotaxis is a short-range guidance mechanism. As such, it can guide spermatozoa for short distances only, estimated at the order of millimeters.\n\nIn humans, there are at least two different origins of sperm chemoattractants. One is the cumulus cells that surround the oocyte, and the other is the mature oocyte itself. The chemoattractant secreted from the cumulus cells is the steroid progesterone, shown to be effective at the picomolar range. The chemoattractant secreted from the oocyte is even more potent. It is a hydrophobic non-peptide molecule which, when secreted from the oocyte, is in complex with a carrier protein Additional compounds have been shown to act as chemoattractants for mammalian spermatozoa. They include the chemokine CCL20, atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP), specific odorants, natriuretic peptide type C (NPPC), and allurin, to mention a few. It is reasonable to assume that not all of them are physiologically relevant.\n\nSpecies specificity was not detected in experiments that compared the chemotactic responsiveness of human and rabbit spermatozoa to follicular fluids or egg-conditioned media obtained from human, bovine, and rabbit. The subsequent findings that cumulus cells of both human and rabbit (and, probably, of other mammals as well) secrete the chemoattractant progesterone is sufficient to account for the lack of specificity in the chemotactic response of mammalian spermatozoa.\n\nMammalian spermatozoa, like sea-urchin spermatozoa, appear to sense the chemoattractant gradient temporally (comparing receptor occupancy over time) rather than spatially (comparing receptor occupancy over space). This is because the establishment of a temporal gradient in the absence of spatial gradient, achieved by mixing human spermatozoa with a chemoattractant or by photorelease of a chemoattractant from its caged compound, results in delayed transient changes in swimming behavior that involve increased frequency of turns and hyperactivation events. On the basis of these observations and the finding that the level of hyperactivation events is reduced when chemotactically responsive spermatozoa swim in a spatial chemoattractant gradient it was proposed that turns and hyperactivation events are suppressed when capacitated spermatozoa swim up a chemoattractant gradient, and vice versa when they swim down a gradient. In other words, human spermatozoa approach chemoattractants by modulating the frequency of turns and hyperactivation events, similarly to \"Escherichia coli\" bacteria.\n\nAs in non-mammalian species, the end signal in chemotaxis for changing the direction of swimming is Ca. The discovery of progesterone as a chemoattractant led to the identification of its receptor on the sperm surface – CatSper, a Ca channel present exclusively in the tail of mammalian spermatozoa. (Note, though, that progesterone only stimulates human CatSper but not mouse CatSper. Consistently, sperm chemotaxis to progesterone was not found in mice.) However, the molecular steps subsequent to CatSper activation by progesterone are obscure, though the involvement of trans-membrane adenylyl cyclase, cAMP and protein kinase A as well as soluble guanylyl cyclase, cGMP, inositol trisphosphate receptor and store-operated Ca channel was proposed.\n\nThe realization that sperm chemotaxis can guide spermatozoa for short distances only, triggered a search for potential long-range guidance mechanisms. The findings that, at least in rabbits and pigs, a temperature difference exists within the oviduct, and that this temperature difference is established at ovulation in rabbits due to a temperature drop in the oviduct near the junction with the uterus, creating a temperature gradient between the sperm storage site and the fertilization site in the oviduct, led to a study of whether mammalian spermatozoa can respond to a temperature gradient by thermotaxis.\n\nMammalian sperm thermotaxis was, hitherto, demonstrated in three species: humans, rabbits, and mice. This was done by two methods. One involved a Zigmond chamber, modified to make the temperature in each well separately controllable and measurable. A linear temperature gradient was established between the wells and the swimming of spermatozoa in this gradient was analyzed. A small fraction of the spermatozoa (at the order of ~10%), shown to be the capacitated cells, biased their swimming direction according to the gradient, moving towards the warmer temperature. The other method involved two - or three-compartment separation tube placed within a thermoseparation device that maintains a linear temperature gradient. Sperm accumulation at the warmer end of the separation tube was much higher than the accumulation at the same temperature but in the absence of a temperature gradient. This gradient-dependent sperm accumulation was observed over a wide temperature range (29-41°C).\nSince temperature affects almost every process, much attention has been devoted to the question of whether the measurements, mentioned just above, truly demonstrate thermotaxis or whether they reflect another temperature-dependent process. The most pronounced effect of temperature in liquid is convection, which raised the concern that the apparent thermotactic response could have been a reflection of a passive drift in the liquid current or a rheotactic response to the current (rather than to the temperature gradient per se). Another concern was that the temperature could have changed the local pH of the buffer solution in which the spermatozoa are suspended. This could generate a pH gradient along the temperature gradient, and the spermatozoa might have responded to the formed pH gradient by chemotaxis. However, careful experimental examinations of all these possibilities with proper controls demonstrated that the measured responses to temperature are true thermotactic responses and that they are not a reflection of any other temperature-sensitive process, including rheotaxis and chemotaxis.\n\nThe behavioral mechanism of sperm thermotaxis has been so far only investigated in human spermatozoa. Like the behavioral mechanisms of bacterial chemotaxis and human sperm chemotaxis, the behavioral mechanism of human sperm thermotaxis appears to be stochastic rather than deterministic. Capacitated human spermatozoa swim in rather straight lines interrupted by turns and brief episodes of hyperactivation. Each such episode results in swimming in a new direction. When the spermatozoa sense a decrease in temperature, the frequency of turns and hyperactivation events increases due to increased flagellar-wave amplitude that results in enhanced side-to-side head displacement. With time, this response undergoes partial adaptation. The opposite happens in response to an increase in temperature. This suggests that when capacitated spermatozoa swim up a temperature gradient, turns are repressed and the spermatozoa continue swimming in the gradient direction. When they happen to swim down the gradient, they turn again and again until their swimming direction is again up the gradient. \n\nThe response of spermatozoa to temporal temperature changes even when the temperature is kept constant spatially suggests that, as in the case of human sperm chemotaxis, sperm thermotaxis involves temporal gradient sensing. In other words, spermatozoa apparently compare the temperature (or a temperature-dependent function) between consecutive time points. This, however, does not exclude the occurrence of spatial temperature sensing in addition to temporal sensing.\nHuman spermatozoa can respond thermotactically within a wide temperature range (at least 29–41°C). Within this range they preferentially accumulate in warmer temperatures rather than at a single specific, preferred temperature. Amazingly, they can sense and thermotactically respond to temperature gradients as low as <0.014°C/mm. This means that when human spermatozoa swim a distance that equals their body length (~46 µm) they respond to a temperature difference of <0.0006°C!\n\nThe molecular mechanism underlying thermotaxis, in general, and thermosensing with such extreme sensitivity, in particular, is obscure. It is known that, unlike other recognized thermosensors in mammals, the thermosensors for sperm thermotaxis do not seem to be temperature-sensitive ion channels. They are rather opsins, known to be G-protein-coupled receptors that act as photosensors in vision. The opsins are present in spermatozoa at specific sites, which depend on the species and the opsin type. They are involved in sperm thermotaxis via at least two signaling pathways: a phospholipase C signaling pathway and a cyclic-nucleotide pathway. The former was shown by pharmacological means in human spermatozoa to involve the enzyme phospholipase C, an inositol trisphosphate receptor located on internal calcium stores, the calcium channel TRPC3, and intracellular calcium. The cyclic-nucleotide pathway was, hitherto, shown to involve phosphodiesterase. Blocking both pathways fully inhibits sperm thermotaxis.\n\nWhen human and mouse spermatozoa are exposed to a fluid flow, roughly one half of them (i.e., both capacitated and noncapacitated spermatozoa) reorient and swim against the current. The flow, which is prolactin-triggered oviductal fluid secretion, is generated in female mice within 4 h of sexual stimulation and coitus. Thus, rheotaxis orients spermatozoa towards the fertilization site. It was proposed that capacitated spermatozoa might detach from the oviductal surface faster than non-capacitated spermatozoa, enabling them to swim into the main current. To understand the mechanism of sperm turning in rheotaxis, quantitative analysis of human sperm flagellar behavior during rheotaxis turning was carried out. The results revealed, both at the single cell and population levels, that there is no significant difference in flagellar beating between rheotaxis turning spermatozoa and free-swimming spermatozoa. This finding taken together with the constant internal Ca signal, measured during rheotaxis turning, demonstrated that, in contrast to the active process of chemotaxis and thermotaxis, human sperm rheotaxis is a passive process and no flow sensing is involved.\n\nLike in any other highly essential system in biology, mammalian sperm guidance is expected to involve redundancy. Indeed, at least three guidance mechanisms are likely to act in the female genital tract, two active mechanisms — chemotaxis and thermotaxis, and a passive mechanism — rheotaxis. When one of these mechanisms is not functional for any reason, guidance is not expected to be lost and the cells should still be able to navigate to the oocyte. This resembles guidance of migrating birds, where the birds’ navigation is unaffected when one of the guidance mechanisms is not functional. \nIt has been suggested that capacitated spermatozoa, released from the sperm storage site at the isthmus, may be first actively guided by thermotaxis from the cooler sperm storage site towards the warmer fertilization site (Figure 2). Two passive processes, rheotaxis and contractions of the oviduct may assist the spermatozoa to reach there. At this location, the spermatozoa may be chemotactically guided to the oocyte-cumulus complex by the gradient of progesterone, secreted from the cumulus cells. In addition, progesterone may inwardly guide spermatozoa, already present within the periphery of the cumulus oophorus. Spermatozoa that are already deep within the cumulus oophorus may sense the more potent chemoattractant that is secreted from the oocyte and chemotactically guide themselves to the oocyte according to the gradient of this chemoattractant. It should be borne in mind, however, that this is only a model. \n\nFigure 2. A simplified scheme describing the suggested sequence of active sperm guidance mechanisms in mammals. In addition, two passive processes, sperm rheotaxis and contractions of the oviduct, may assist sperm movement towards the fertilization site.\n\nA number of observations point to the possibility that chemotaxis and thermotaxis also occur at lower parts of the female genital tract. For example, small, gradual estrus cycle-correlated temperature increase was measured in cows from the vagina towards the uterine horns, and a gradient of natriuretic peptide precursor A, shown to be a chemoattractant for mouse spermatozoa, was found, in decreasing concentration order, in the ampulla, isthmus, and uterotubal junction. The physiological functions, if any, of these chemical and temperature gradients are yet to be resolved.\n\nSperm guidance by either chemotaxis or thermotaxis can potentially be used to obtain sperm populations that are enriched with capacitated spermatozoa for in vitro fertilization procedures. They can also be exploited as a diagnostic tool to assess sperm quality. In addition, these processes can potentially be used, in the long run, as a means of contraception by interfering with the normal process of fertilization.\n", "id": "22066537", "title": "Sperm guidance"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22164767", "text": "Sperm chemotaxis\n\nSperm chemotaxis is a form of sperm guidance, in which sperm cells (spermatozoa) follow a concentration gradient of a chemoattractant secreted from the oocyte and thereby reach the oocyte.\n\nSince the discovery of sperm attraction to the female gametes in ferns over a century ago, sperm guidance in the form of sperm chemotaxis has been established in a large variety of species Although sperm chemotaxis is prevalent throughout the Metazoa kingdom, from marine species with external fertilization such as sea urchins and corals, to humans, much of the current information on sperm chemotaxis is derived from studies of marine invertebrates, primarily sea urchin and starfish. As a matter of fact, until not too long ago, the dogma was that, in mammals, guidance of spermatozoa to the oocyte was unnecessary. This was due to the common belief that, following ejaculation into the female genital tract, large numbers of spermatozoa 'race' towards the oocyte and compete to fertilize it. This belief was taken apart when it became clear that only few of the ejaculated spermatozoa — in humans, only ~1 of every million spermatozoa — succeed in entering the oviducts (Fallopian tubes) and when more recent studies showed that mammalian spermatozoa do respond chemotactically.\n\nIn sperm chemotaxis, the oocyte secretes a chemoattractant, which, as it diffuses away, forms a concentration gradient: a high concentration close to the egg, and a gradually lower concentration as the distance from the oocyte increases. Spermatozoa can sense this chemoattractant and orient their swimming direction up the concentration gradient towards the oocyte. Sperm chemotaxis was demonstrated in a large number of non-mammalian species, from marine invertebrates to frogs.\n\nThe sperm chemoattractants in non-mammalian species vary to a large extent. Some examples are shown in Table 1. So far, most sperm chemoattractants that have been identified in non-mammalian species are peptides or low-molecular-weight proteins (1–20 kDa), which are heat stable and sensitive to proteases. Exceptions to this rule are the sperm chemoattractants of corals, ascidians, plants such as ferns, and algae (Table 1).\n\n\nThe variety of chemoattractants raises the question of species specificity with respect to the chemoattractant identity. There is no single rule for chemoattractant-related specificity. Thus, in some groups of marine invertebrates (e.g., hydromedusae and certain ophiuroids), the specificity is very high; in others (e.g., starfish), the specificity is at the family level and, within the family, there is no specificity. In mollusks, there appears to be no specificity at all. Likewise, in plants, a unique simple compound [e.g., fucoserratene — a linear, unsaturated alkene (1,3-trans 5-cis-octatriene)] might be a chemoattractant for various species.\nHere, too, there is no single rule. In some species (for example, in hydroids like \"Campanularia\" or tunicate like \"Ciona\"), the swimming direction of the spermatozoa changes abruptly towards the chemoattractant source. In others (for example, in sea urchin, hydromedusa, fern, or fish such as Japanese bitterlings), the approach to the chemoattractant source is indirect and the movement is by repetitive loops of small radii. In some species (for example, herring or the ascidian Ciona) activation of motility precedes chemotaxis. In chemotaxis, cells may either sense a temporal gradient of the chemoattractant, comparing the occupancy of its receptors at different time points (as do bacteria), or they may detect a spatial gradient, comparing the occupancy of receptors at different locations along the cell (as do leukocytes). In the best-studied species, sea urchin, the spermatozoa sense a temporal gradient and respond to it with a transient increase in flagellar asymmetry. The outcome is a turn in the swimming path, followed by a period of straight swimming, leading to the observed epicycloid-like movements directed towards the chemoattractant source.\n\nThe molecular mechanism of sperm chemotaxis is still not fully known. The current knowledge is mainly based on studies in the sea urchin \"Arbacia punctulata\", where binding of the chemoattractant resact (Table 1) to its receptor, a guanylyl cyclase, activates cGMP synthesis (Figure 1). The resulting rise of cGMP possibly activates K-selective ion channels. The consequential hyperpolarization activates hyperpolarization-activated and cyclic nucleotide-gated (HCN) channels. The depolarizing inward current through HCN channels possibly activates voltage-activated Ca channels, resulting in elevation of intracellular Ca. This rise leads to flagellar asymmetry and, consequently, a turn of the sperm cell.\n\nA model of the signal-transduction pathway during sperm chemotaxis of the sea urchin \"Arbacia punctulata\". Binding of a chemoattractant (ligand) to the receptor — a membrane-bound guanylyl cyclase (GC) — activates the synthesis of cGMP from GTP. Cyclic GMP possibly opens cyclic nucleotide-gated (CNG) K-selective channels, thereby causing hyperpolarization of the membrane. The cGMP signal is terminated by the hydrolysis of cGMP through phosphodiesterase (PDE) activity and inactivation of GC. On hyperpolarization, hyperpolarization-activated and cyclic nucleotide-gated (HCN) channels allow the influx of Na that leads to depolarization and thereby causes a rapid Ca entry through voltage-activated Ca channels (Ca), Ca ions interact by unknown mechanisms with the axoneme of the flagellum and cause an increase of the asymmetry of flagellar beat and eventually a turn or bend in the swimming trajectory. Ca is removed from the flagellum by a Na/Ca exchange mechanism. (Taken from ref.)\n\nFollowing the findings that human spermatozoa accumulate in follicular fluid and that there is a remarkable correlation between this in vitro accumulation and oocyte fertilization, chemotaxis was substantiated as the cause of this accumulation. Sperm chemotaxis was later also demonstrated in mice and rabbits. In addition, sperm accumulation in follicular fluid (but without substantiating that it truly reflects chemotaxis) was demonstrated in horses and pigs. A key feature of sperm chemotaxis in humans is that this process is restricted to capacitated cells — the only cells that possess the ability to penetrate the oocyte and fertilize it. This raised the possibility that, in mammals, chemotaxis is not solely a guidance mechanism but it is also a mechanism of sperm selection. Importantly, the fraction of capacitated (and, hence, chemotactically responsive) spermatozoa is low (~10% in humans), the life span of the capacitated/chemotactic state is short (1–4 hours in humans), a spermatozoon can be at this state only once in its lifetime, and sperm individuals become capacitated/chemotactic at different time points, resulting in continuous replacement of capacitated/chemotactic cells within the sperm population, i.e., prolonged availability of capacitated cells. These sperm features raised the possibility that prolonging the time period, during which capacitated spermatozoa can be found in the female genital tract, is a mechanism, evolved in humans, to compensate for the lack of coordination between insemination and ovulation. \n\nIn humans, there are at least two different origins of sperm chemoattractants. One is the cumulus cells that surround the oocyte, and the other is the mature oocyte itself. The chemoattractant secreted from the cumulus cells is the steroid progesterone, shown to be effective at the picomolar range. The chemoattractant secreted from the oocyte is even more potent. It is a hydrophobic non-peptide molecule which, when secreted from the oocyte, is in complex with a carrier protein Additional compounds have been shown to act as chemoattractants for mammalian spermatozoa. They include the chemokine CCL20, atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP), specific odorants, natriuretic peptide type C (NPPC), and allurin, to mention a few. It is reasonable to assume that not all of them are physiologically relevant.\n\nSpecies specificity was not detected in experiments that compared the chemotactic responsiveness of human and rabbit spermatozoa to follicular fluids or egg-conditioned media obtained from human, bovine, and rabbit. The subsequent findings that cumulus cells of both human and rabbit (and, probably, of other mammals as well) secrete the chemoattractant progesterone is sufficient to account for the lack of specificity in the chemotactic response of mammalian spermatozoa.\n\nMammalian spermatozoa, like sea-urchin spermatozoa, appear to sense the chemoattractant gradient temporally (comparing receptor occupancy over time) rather than spatially (comparing receptor occupancy over space). This is because the establishment of a temporal gradient in the absence of spatial gradient, achieved by mixing human spermatozoa with a chemoattractant or by photorelease of a chemoattractant from its caged compound, results in delayed transient changes in swimming behavior that involve increased frequency of turns and hyperactivation events. On the basis of these observations and the finding that the level of hyperactivation events is reduced when chemotactically responsive spermatozoa swim in a spatial chemoattractant gradient it was proposed that turns and hyperactivation events are suppressed when capacitated spermatozoa swim up a chemoattractant gradient, and vice versa when they swim down a gradient. In other words, human spermatozoa approach chemoattractants by modulating the frequency of turns and hyperactivation events, similarly to \"Escherichia coli\" bacteria.\n\nAs in non-mammalian species, the end signal in chemotaxis for changing the direction of swimming is Ca. The discovery of progesterone as a chemoattractant led to the identification of its receptor on the sperm surface – CatSper, a Ca channel present exclusively in the tail of mammalian spermatozoa. (Note, though, that progesterone only stimulates human CatSper but not mouse CatSper. Consistently, sperm chemotaxis to progesterone was not found in mice.) However, the molecular steps subsequent to CatSper activation by progesterone are obscure, though the involvement of trans-membrane adenylyl cyclase, cAMP and protein kinase A as well as soluble guanylyl cyclase, cGMP, inositol trisphosphate receptor and store-operated Ca channel was proposed.\n\nChemotaxis is a short-range guidance mechanism. As such, it can guide spermatozoa for short distances only, estimated at the order of millimeters. It is, therefore, believed that, in mammals, sperm chemotaxis occurs in the oviduct, close to the oocyte. First spermatozoa may be chemotactically guided to the oocyte-cumulus complex by the gradient of progesterone, secreted from the cumulus cells. In addition, progesterone may inwardly guide spermatozoa, already present within the periphery of the cumulus oophorus. Spermatozoa that are already deep within the cumulus oophorus may sense the more potent chemoattractant that is secreted from the oocyte and chemotactically guide themselves to the oocyte according to the gradient of this chemoattractant. It should be borne in mind, however, that this scenario may be an oversimplification. In view of the increasing number of different chemoattractants that are being discovered, the physiology of chemotaxis \"in vivo\" might be much more complex.\n\n", "id": "22164767", "title": "Sperm chemotaxis"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4060393", "text": "Intracrine\n\nIntracrine refers to a hormone that acts inside a cell, regulating intracellular events. Steroid hormones act through intracellular (mostly nuclear) receptors and, thus, may be considered to be intracrines. In contrast, peptide or protein hormones, in general, act as endocrines, autocrines, or paracrines by binding to their receptors present on the cell surface. Several peptide/protein hormones or their isoforms also act inside the cell through different mechanisms. These peptide/protein hormones, which have intracellular functions, are also called intracrines. The term 'intracrine' is thought to have been coined to represent peptide/protein hormones that also have intracellular actions.\n\nThe biological effects produced by intracellular actions are referred as intracrine effects, whereas those produced by binding to cell surface receptors are called endocrine, autocrine, or paracrine effects, depending on the origin of the hormone. The intracrine effect of some of the peptide/protein hormones are similar to their endocrine, autocrine, or paracrine effects; however, these effects are different for some other hormones.\n\nIntracrine can also refer to a hormone acting within the cell that synthesizes it.\n\nExamples of intracrine peptide hormones: There are several protein/peptide hormones that are also intracrines. Notable examples that have been described in the references include:\n\n• Peptides of the Renin-angiotensin system: Angiotensin II and Angiotensin (1-7)\n\n• Fibroblast Growth Factor -2\n\n• Parathyroid hormone-related protein\n\n", "id": "4060393", "title": "Intracrine"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22643577", "text": "Xenbase\n\nXenbase is a Model Organism Database (MOD), providing informatics resources, as well as genomic and biological data on Xenopus frogs.\nXenbase has been available since 1999, and covers both X. laevis and X. tropicalis Xenopus varieties. As of 2013 all of its services are running on virtual machines in a private cloud environment, making it one of the first MODs to do so. Other than hosting genomics data and tools, Xenbase supports the Xenopus research community though profiles for researchers and laboratories, job and events postings, and a number of discussion forums at http://forums.xenbase.org.\n\nXenbase runs in a cloud environment. Its virtual machines are running in a VMware vSphere environment on two servers, with automatic load balancing and fault tolerance. Xenbase software uses Java, JSP, JavaScript, AJAX, XML, and CSS. It also uses IBM's WebSphere Application Server and the IBM DB2 database.\n\nThe Xenopus model organism is responsible for large amounts of new knowledge on embryonic development and cell biology. Xenopus has a number of unique experimental advantages as a vertebrate model. Paramount among these is the robustness of early embryos and their amenability to microinjection and microsurgery. This makes them a particularly attractive system for testing the ectopic activity of gene products and loss-of-function experiments using antagonizing reagents such as morpholinos, dominant-negatives and neomorphic proteins. Morpholinos are synthetic oligonucleotides that can be used to inhibit nuclear RNA splicing or mRNA translation and are the common gene inhibition reagent in Xenopus as neither siRNA or miRNA have yet been shown to reproducibly function in frog embryos. Xenopus embryos develop very quickly and form a full set of differentiated tissues within days of fertilization, allowing rapid analysis of the effects of manipulating embryonic gene expression. The large size of embryos and amenability to microinjection also makes them extremely well suited to microarray approaches. Furthermore, these same characteristics make Xenopus, one of the few vertebrate model organisms suited for chemical screens. Xenbase provides a large database of images illustrating the full genome, movies detailing embryogenesis, and multiple online tools useful for designing and conducting experiments using \"Xenopus\".\n\nXenbase provides many tools useful for both professional research as well as academic learning. Highlighted below are a few of the tools, along with a brief description. For full details on provided tools, users are referred to Xenbase's publications.\n\n\nThe Nobel Prize for Medicine or Physiology was awarded to John B. Gurdon and Shinya Yamanaka on October 8, 2012. for nuclear reprogramming in Xenopus.\n\nImportance: Gurdon's experiments challenged the dogma of the time which suggested that the nucleus of a differentiated cell is committed to their fate (Example: a liver cell nucleus remains a liver cell nucleus and cannot return to an undifferentiated state).\n\nSpecifically, John Gurdon's experiments showed that a mature or differentiated cell nucleus can be returned to its immature undifferentiated form; this is the first instance of cloning of a vertebrate animal.\n\nExperiment: Gurdon used a technique known as nuclear transfer to replace the killed-off nucleus of a frog (\"Xenopus\") egg with a nucleus from a mature cell (intestinal epithelial). The tadpoles resulting from these eggs did not survive long (past the gastrulation stage), however, further transformation of the nuclei from these\" Xenopus \"eggs to a second set of \"Xenopus\" eggs resulted in fully developed tadpoles. This process (transfer of nuclei from cloned cells) is referred to as serial transplantation.\n\nTo provide examples of how Xenbase could be used to facilitate academic research, two research articles are briefly described below.\n\n\nThis paper uses Xenbase resources to create and characterize mutations in \"Xenopus tropicalis\". Goda et al., performed a large scale forward genetics screen on X. tropicalis embryos to identify novel mutations (2006). Defects were noted and put into 10 different categories as follows: eye, ear, neural crest/pigment, dwarf, axial, gut, cardiovascular, head, cardiovascular plus motility, and circulation. Further studies were performed on the whitehart mutant \"wha\" which does not have normal circulating blood. The Xenopus Molecular Marker Resource page was used to design a microarray experiment which compared wild type (normal circulation) and \"wha\" mutant \"X. tropicalis\". Analysis of microarray data revealed that 216 genes had significant changes in expression, with genes involved in hemoglobin and heme biosynthesis being the most affected, consistent with the observation that \"wha\" may have a role in hematopoiesis.\n\n\nThe 2013 paper by Suzuki et al. describes the use of a relatively new gene knockdown technique in \"X. laevis\". Traditionally, antisense morpholino oligonucleotides have been the method of choice to study the effects of transient gene knockdown in \"Xenopus\".\n\nIn comparison to morpholinos which disrupt gene expression by inhibiting translational machinery TALENs disrupt gene expression by binding to DNA and introducing double stranded breaks. Xenbase was utilized to obtain publicly available sequences for tyrosinase (tyr) and pax6, needed for TALEN design. Knockdown of both pax6 and tyr was highly efficient using TALENs, suggesting that gene disruption using TALENs may be an alternative or better method to use in comparison to antisense morpholino's.\n\n", "id": "22643577", "title": "Xenbase"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6227883", "text": "Cell physiology\n\nCell physiology (including cellular electrophysiology) is the biological study (which has been a very indispensable study in the last several years) about the activities that take place in a cell to keep it alive. This includes, among animal cells, plant cells and microorganisms. The term \"physiology\" refers to all the normal functions that take place in a living organism. All of these activities in the cell could be counted as following ; nutrition, environmental response , cell growth , cell division , reproduction and differentiation. The differences among the animal cell, plant cell and microorganisms shows the essential functional similarity eventhough those cells have different structures. Absorption of water by roots, production of food in the leaves, and growth of shoots towards light are examples of plant physiology. The heterotrophic metabolism of food derived from plants and animals and the use of movement to obtain nutrients (even if the organism itself remains in a relatively stationary position) are characteristic of animal physiology.\n\nIn the context of human physiology, the term \"cell physiology\" often specifically applies to the physiology of membrane transport, neuron transmission, and (less frequently) muscle contraction. In general, these cover the digestion of food, circulation of blood, and contraction of muscles and, therefore, are important aspects of human physiology. For a more complete description of the general physiological function of human cells (as well as the cells of other life forms), see the article on cell biology.\n\nExperimental approach in cell physiology is an important aspect in cell physiology because it utilizes the experimental methods in order to solve any scientific issue related to physiology. the following examples have been studied in cellular problems by using the experimental method: First, the key of understanding cells' activities in animal, plant cells and microorganisms was studied by identified the nature of organization of cells. Second, the differences of the environment plays a role of the nature of the cell environment, cell resistance and the adjustment. Third, the nature of the cell in regulating and transporting materials into and out the cells crossing the cell membrane. Fourth, Cell foods and its inter-conversions and the mechanism of respiration process to release energy from cell's food. Fifth, the use of energy in respiration in terms of performing the variety types of work. For example, maintenance, readiness, osmotic and for manufacturing of secretions. \n\nThe relation of cell physiology to different fields of physiology such as, animal physiology, comparative animal physiology, plant physiology and molecular biology are being fundamental parts of physiology field. Animal physiology plays a role of the work of various organs of the body which those organs coordinate to integrate the animal behavior. medical men in were concerned about vertebrate organ physiology precisely with mammals, because the information provided could be beneficially applied to the physiology of human in health and diseases. it is a beneficial to work on organ physiology as an medical approach. However, the Cellular level can be used as well. In addition, Comparative animal physiology is a prat of studying the function of any organ in various types of animals such as, vertebrate and invertebrate to find the fundamental relations. Plant physiology is more likely concerns about the response, nutrition, growth and reproduction of different types of plants. and Since the functioning of the animal and plant depend on the function of the cells component. All of these physiological studies have been recognized by researchers whom were interested in organisms and worked at the cellular level to solve problems at the organs levels. on the other hand, Molecular biology turns to explain the cells activities in at the molecular level.In the past time, it has been limited in studying activities of viruses and bacteria. However, now it is being extended on studying the activities of the Eukaryota cells. Molecular biology has been contributed as an aim for cell physiology by being as powerful source of mutants (this method has been applied to many issues in cell physiology) such as, transportation across the cell membrane and the nature of the membranes. However, many of the cell physiology problems have not been solved by the molecular approach.\n\nThere are two types of cells: Prokaryotes and Eukaryotes. \n\nProkaryotes first came into existence and contain no self-contained nucleus, therefore making their mechanisms much simpler compared to the later-evolved Eukaryotes, which do contain a nucleus enveloping the cell's DNA and nuclear organelles. Because viruses, viroids, prions and such (see Acytota/Aphanobionta) depend entirely on the physiology of other cells (i.e., cells containing their own physiology), the former entities are often not considered to be \"living\" by the biologists who study them.\n\nAll living cells, whether prokaryotes or eukaryotes, contain the following distinguishing characteristics:\n\nBased on the properties shared by all independently living organisms on Earth,\n\nThe earliest ancestor of all life that is hypothesized to contain these attributes is known as the last common ancestor.\n\n\n5- < Cellular Physiology : Henry T.Yost> \n6- < Cell Physiology : Arthur c> Giese, PH.D.> \n", "id": "6227883", "title": "Cell physiology"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5106530", "text": "Lamella (cell biology)\n\nA \"lamella\" (plural: \"lamellae\") in biology refers to a thin layer, membrane, or plate of tissue. This is a very broad definition, and can refer to many different structures. Any thin layer of organic tissue can be called a lamella and there is a wide array of functions an individual layer can serve. For example, an intercellular lipid lamella is formed when lamellar disks fuse together to form a lamellar sheet. It is believed that these disks are formed from vesicles, giving the lamellar sheet a lipid bilayer that plays a role in water diffusion. \n\nAnother instance of cellular lamellae, can be seen in chloroplasts. Thylakoid membranes are actually a system of lamellar membranes working together, and are differentiated into different lamellar domains. This lamellar system allows plants to convert sunlight into energy. Chloroplasts are characterized by a system of membranes embedded in a hydrophobic proteinaceous matrix, or stroma. The basic unit of the membrane system is a flattened single vesicle called the thylakoid; thylakoids stack into grana. All the thylakoids of a granum are connected with each other, and the grana are connected by intergranal lamellae.\n\nIt is placed between the two primary cell walls of two plant cells and made up of intracellular matrix. The lamella comprises a mixture of polygalacturons (D-galacturonic acid) and neutral carbohydrates. It is soluble in the pectinase enzyme.\n\n\"Lamella\", in cell biology, is also used to describe the leading edge of a motile cell, of which the lamellipodia is the most forward portion.\n\nThe lipid bilayer core of biological membranes is also called lamellar phase. Thus, each bilayer of multilamellar liposomes and wall of a unilamellar liposome is also referred to as a \"lamella\".\n", "id": "5106530", "title": "Lamella (cell biology)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5523586", "text": "Progenitor cell\n\nA progenitor cell is a biological cell that, like a stem cell, has a tendency to differentiate into a specific type of cell, but is already more specific than a stem cell and is pushed to differentiate into its \"target\" cell. The most important difference between stem cells and progenitor cells is that stem cells can replicate indefinitely, whereas progenitor cells can divide only a limited number of times. Controversy about the exact definition remains and the concept is still evolving.\n\nThe terms \"progenitor cell\" and \"stem cell\" are sometimes equated.\n\nMost progenitors are described as oligopotent. In this point of view, they may be compared to adult stem cells. But progenitors are said to be in a further stage of cell differentiation. They are in the “center” between stem cells and fully differentiated cells. The kind of potency they have depends on the type of their \"parent\" stem cell and also on their niche. Some progenitor cells were found during research, and were isolated. After their marker was found, it was proven that these progenitor could move through the body and migrate towards the tissue where they are needed. Many properties are shared by adult stem cells and progenitor cells.\n\nProgenitor cells are found in adult organisms and they act as a repair system for the body. They replenish special cells, but also maintain the blood, skin and intestinal tissues. They can also be found in developing embryonic pancreatic tissue.\n\nThe majority of progenitor cells lie dormant or possess little activity in the tissue in which they reside. They exhibit slow growth and their main role is to replace cells lost by normal attrition. In case of tissue injury, damaged or dead cells, progenitor cells can be activated. Growth factors or cytokines are two substances that trigger the progenitors to mobilize toward the damaged tissue. At the same time, they start to differentiate into the target cells. Not all progenitors are mobile and are situated near the tissue of their target differentiation. When the cytokines, growth factors and other cell division enhancing stimulators take on the progenitors, a higher rate of cell division is introduced. It leads to the recovery of the tissue.\n\nThe characterization or the defining principle of progenitor cells, in order to separate them from others, is based on the different cell markers rather than their morphological appearance.\n\n\nBefore embryonic day 40 (E40), progenitor cells generate other progenitor cells; after that period, progenitor cells produce only dissimilar mesenchymal stem cell daughters. The cells from a single progenitor cell form a proliferative unit that creates one cortical column; these columns contain a variety of neurons with different shapes.\n\n", "id": "5523586", "title": "Progenitor cell"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3587852", "text": "Scaffold protein\n\nIn biology, scaffold proteins are crucial regulators of many key signalling pathways. Although scaffolds are not strictly defined in function, they are known to interact and/or bind with multiple members of a signalling pathway, tethering them into complexes. In such pathways, they regulate signal transduction and help localize pathway components (organized in complexes) to specific areas of the cell such as the plasma membrane, the cytoplasm, the nucleus, the Golgi, endosomes, and the mitochondria.\n\nThe first signaling scaffold protein discovered was the Ste5 protein from the yeast \"Saccharomyces cerevisiae\". Three distinct domains of Ste5 were shown to associate with the protein kinases Ste11, Ste7, and Fus3 to form a multikinase complex.\n\nScaffold proteins act in at least four ways: tethering signaling components, localizing these components to specific areas of the cell, regulating signal transduction by coordinating positive and negative feedback signals, and insulating correct signaling proteins from competing proteins.\n\nThis particular function is considered a scaffold's most basic function. Scaffolds assemble signaling components of a cascade into complexes. This assembly may be able to enhance signaling specificity by preventing unnecessary interactions between signaling proteins, and enhance signaling efficiency by increasing the proximity and effective concentration of components in the scaffold complex. A common example of how scaffolds enhance specificity is a scaffold that binds a protein kinase and its substrate, thereby ensuring specific kinase phosphorylation. Additionally, some signaling proteins require multiple interactions for activation and scaffold tethering may be able to convert these interactions into one interaction that results in multiple modifications. Scaffolds may also be catalytic as interaction with signaling proteins may result in allosteric changes of these signaling components. Such changes may be able to enhance or inhibit the activation of these signaling proteins. An example is the Ste5 scaffold in the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway. Ste5 has been proposed to direct mating signaling through the Fus3 MAPK by catalytically unlocking this particular kinase for activation by its MAPKK Ste7.\n\nScaffolds localize the signaling reaction to a specific area in the cell, a process that could be important for the local production of signaling intermediates. A particular example of this process is the scaffold, A-kinase anchor proteins (AKAPs), which target cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) to various sites in the cell. This localization is able to locally regulate PKA and results in the local phosphorylation by PKA of its substrates.\n\nMany hypotheses about how scaffolds coordinate positive and negative feedback come from engineered scaffolds and mathematical modeling. In three-kinase signaling cascades, scaffolds bind all three kinases, enhancing kinase specificity and restricting signal amplification by limiting kinase phosphorylation to only one downstream target. These abilities may be related to stability of the interaction between the scaffold and the kinases, the basal phosphatase activity in the cell, scaffold location, and expression levels of the signaling components.\n\nSignaling pathways are often inactivated by enzymes that reverse the activation state and/or induce the degradation of signaling components. Scaffolds have been proposed to protect activated signaling molecules from inactivation and/or degradation. Mathematical modeling has shown that kinases in a cascade without scaffolds have a higher probability of being dephosphorylated by phosphatases before they are even able to phosphorylate downstream targets. Furthermore, scaffolds have been shown to insulate kinases from substrate- and ATP-competitive inhibitors.\n", "id": "3587852", "title": "Scaffold protein"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22889187", "text": "Cellular memory modules\n\nCellular memory modules (CMMs) refers to the ability of cells to remember and propagate their gene expression programs throughout the entire development. This basic developmental function has been conserved during evolution, as related mechanisms were identified in other model organisms.\n", "id": "22889187", "title": "Cellular memory modules"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22894053", "text": "Fractional kill\n\nIn oncology, the fact that one round of chemotherapy does not kill all the cells in a tumor is a poorly understood phenomenon called fractional kill, or fractional cell kill.\n\nThe fractional kill hypothesis states that a defined chemotherapy concentration, applied for a defined time period, will kill a constant fraction of the cells in a population, independent of the absolute number of cells. In solid tumors, poor access of the tumor to the drug can limit the fraction of tumor cells killed, but the validity of the fractional kill hypothesis has also been established in animal models of leukemia, as well as in human leukemia and lymphoma, where drug access is less of an issue.\n\nBecause only a fraction of the cells die with each treatment, repeated doses must be administered to continue to reduce the size of the tumor. Current chemotherapy regimens apply drug treatment in cycles, with the frequency and duration of treatments limited by toxicity to the patient. The goal is to reduce the tumor population to zero with successive fractional kills. For example, assuming a 99% kill per cycle of chemotherapy, a tumor of 10 cells would be reduced to less than one cell with six treatment cycles: 10 * 0.01 < 1. However, the tumor can also re-grow during the intervals between treatments, limiting the net reduction of each fractional kill.\n\nThe fractional killing of tumors in response to treatment is assumed to be due to the cell cycle specificity of chemotherapy drugs. Cytarabine, a DNA-synthesis inhibitor also known as ara-C, is cited as the classic cell cycle phase-specific agent. Chemotherapy dosing schedules have been optimized based on the fact that cytarabine is only expected to be effective in the DNA synthesis (S) phase of the cell cycle. Consistent with this, leukemia patients respond better to cytarabine treatments given every 12 hours rather than every 24 hours. This finding that can be explained by the fact that S-phase in these leukemia cells lasts 18–20 hours, allowing some cells to escape the cytotoxic effect of the drug if it is given every 24 hours. However, alternative explanations are possible, as described below.\n\nVery little direct information is available on whether cells undergo apoptosis from a certain point in the cell cycle. One study which did address this topic used flow cytometry or elutriation of synchronized cells treated with actinomycin D1, camptothecin, or aphidicolin, each of which had been documented to exert its effects in a particular phase of the cell cycle. Surprisingly, the authors found that each of the agents was able to induce apoptosis in all phases of the cell cycle, suggesting that the mechanism through which the drugs induce apoptosis may be independent of the drugs’ biochemical targets. In fact, a trace through the literature on the S-phase specificity of cytarabine leads to studies that simply assume S-phase specificity based on cytarabine’s reported site of biochemical action, which the later papers reference. The lack of a cell cycle effect for camptothecin has also been reported recently in a live-cell microscopy study.\n\nA recent paper by Spencer et al. raises the possibility that cell-to-cell variability in protein concentrations may contribute to fractional killing in the case of treatment with TRAIL (TNF-related apoptosis inducing ligand). TRAIL is a ligand native to the human body that is currently being developed as a cancer treatment. Spencer et al. observed fractional killing at a single cell level in several cell lines, even in genetically identical populations grown in homogeneous environments. This paper ruled out the conventional explanation (cell cycle effects) in two of these cell lines, and provided evidence supporting the hypothesis that random variation in cellular initial conditions causes some cells to die while allowing others to survive.\n", "id": "22894053", "title": "Fractional kill"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=412937", "text": "Teichoic acid\n\nTeichoic acids (\"cf.\" Greek τεῖχος, \"teīkhos\", \"wall\", to be specific a fortification wall, as opposed to τοῖχος, \"toīkhos\", a regular wall) are bacterial copolymers of glycerol phosphate or ribitol phosphate and carbohydrates linked via phosphodiester bonds.\n\nTeichoic acids are found within the cell wall of most Gram-positive bacteria such as species in the genera \"Staphylococcus\", \"Streptococcus\", \"Bacillus\", \"Clostridium\", \"Corynebacterium\", and \"Listeria\", and appear to extend to the surface of the peptidoglycan layer. Teichoic acids are not found in Gram-negative bacteria. They can be covalently linked to \"N\"-acetylmuramic acid or a terminal -alanine in the tetrapeptide crosslinkage between \"N\"-acetylmuramic acid units of the peptidoglycan layer, or they can be anchored in the cytoplasmic membrane with a lipid anchor.\n\nTeichoic acids that are anchored to the lipid membrane are referred to as lipoteichoic acids (LTAs), whereas teichoic acids that are covalently bound to peptidoglycan are referred to as wall teichoic acids (WTA).\n\nThe most common structures are a ManNAc(β1→4)GlcNAc disaccharide with one to three glycerol phosphates attached to the C4 hydroxyl of the ManNAc residue followed by a long chain of glycerol- or ribitol phosphate repeats.\n\nThe main function of teichoic acids is to provide rigidity to the cell-wall by attracting cations such as magnesium and sodium. Teichoic acids can be substituted with -alanine ester residues, or -glucosamine, giving the molecule zwitterionic properties. These zwitterionic teichoic acids are suspected ligands for toll-like receptors 2 and 4. Teichoic acids also assist in regulation of cell growth by limiting the ability of autolysins to break the β(1-4) bond between the \"N\"-acetyl glucosamine and the \"N\"-acetylmuramic acid.\n\nLipoteichoic acids may also act as receptor molecules for some Gram-positive bacteriophage; however, this has not yet been conclusively supported.\nIt is an acidic polymer and contributes negative charge to the cell wall.\n\nEnzymes involved in the biosynthesis of WTAs have been named : TarO, TarA, TarB, TarF, TarK, and TarL.\nThis was proposed in 2004.\n\n", "id": "412937", "title": "Teichoic acid"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22762505", "text": "Epithelial polarity\n\nCell polarity is a fundamental feature of many types of cells. Epithelial cells are one example of a polarized cell type, featuring distinct 'apical', 'lateral' and 'basal' plasma membrane domains. Epithelial cells connect to one another via their lateral membranes to form epithelial sheets that line cavities and surfaces throughout the animal body. Each plasma membrane domain has a distinct protein composition, giving them distinct properties and allowing directional transport of molecules across the epithelial sheet. How epithelial cells generate and maintain polarity remains unclear, but certain molecules have been found to play a key role.\n\nA variety of molecules are located at the apical membrane, but only a few key molecules act as determinants that are required to maintain the identity of the apical membrane and, thus, epithelial polarity. These molecules are the proteins Cdc42, atypical protein kinase C (aPKC), Par6, Par3/Bazooka/ASIP. Crumbs, \"Stardust\" and protein at tight junctions (PATJ). These molecules appear to form two distinct complexes: an aPKC-Par3-Par6 \"aPKC\" (or \"Par\") complex that also interacts with Cdc42; and a Crumbs-Stardust-PATJ \"Crumbs\" complex. Of these two complexes, the aPKC complex is the most important for epithelial polarity, being required even when the Crumbs complex is not. Crumbs is the only transmembrane protein in this list and the Crumbs complex serves as an apical cue to keep the aPKC complex apical during complex cellular shape changes.\n\nIn the context of renal tubule physiology, the term basolateral membrane or serosal membrane refers to the cell membrane which is oriented \"away\" from the lumen of the tubule, whereas the term luminal membrane or apical membrane refers to the cell membrane which is oriented \"towards\" the lumen. The principal function of this basolateral membrane is to take up metabolic waste products into the epithelial cell for disposal into the lumen where it is transported out of the body as urine. A secondary role of the basolateral membrane is to allow the recycling of desirable substrates, such as glucose, that have been rescued from the lumen of the tubule to be secreted into the interstitial fluids.\n\nBasal and lateral membranes share common determinants, the proteins Lethal Giant Larvae (Lgl), Discs Large (Dlg) and Scribble (Scrib). These three proteins all localize to the basolateral domain and are essential for basolateral identity and for epithelial polarity.\n\nHow epithelial cells polarize is still not fully understood. Some key principles have been proposed to maintain polarity, but the mechanisms behind these principles remain to be discovered.\n\nThe first principle is positive feedback. In computer models, a molecule that can be either membrane-associated or cytoplasmic can polarize when its association with the membrane is subject to positive feedback: that membrane localization occurs most strongly where the molecule is already most highly concentrated. In the yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae, there is genetic evidence that Cdc42 is subject to positive feedback of this kind and can spontaneously polarize, even in the absence of an external cue. In the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster, Cdc42 is recruited by the aPKC complex and then promotes the apical localization of the aPKC complex in a probable positive feedback loop. Thus, in the absence of Cdc42 or the aPKC complex, apical determinants cannot be maintained at the apical membrane and consequently apical identity and polarity is lost.\n\nThe second principle is segregation of polarity determinants. The sharp distinction between apical and baso-lateral domains is maintained by an active mechanism that prevents mixing. The nature of this mechanism is not known, but it clearly depends on the polarity determinants. In the absence of the aPKC complex, the baso-lateral determinants spread into the former apical domain. Conversely, in the absence of any of Lgl, Dlg or Scrib, the apical determinants spread into the former baso-lateral domain. Thus, the two determinants behave as if they exert mutual repulsion upon one another.\n\nThe third principle is directed exocytosis. Apical membrane proteins are trafficked from the Golgi to the apical, rather than baso-lateral, membrane because apical determinants serve to identify the correct destination for vesicle delivery. A related mechanism is likely to operate for the baso-lateral membranes.\n\nThe fourth principle is lipid modification. A component of the lipid bilayer, phosphatidyl inositol phosphate (PIP) can be phosphorylated to form PIP and PIP. In some epithelial cells, PIP is apically localised while PIP is basolaterally localised. In at least one cultured cell line, the MDCK cell, this system is required for epithelial polarity. The relationship between this system and the polarity determinants in animal tissues remains unclear.\n\nSince basal and lateral membranes share the same determinants, another mechanism must make the difference between the two domains. Cell shape and contacts provide the likely mechanism. Lateral membranes are the site of contact between epithelial cells, whereas basal membranes connect epithelial cells to the basement membrane, an extracellular matrix layer that lies along the basal surface of the epithelium. Certain molecules, such as Integrins, localise specifically to the basal membrane and form connections with the extracellular matrix.\n\nEpithelial cells come in a variety of shapes that relate to their function in development or physiology. How epithelial cells adopt particular shapes is poorly understood, but it must involve spatial control of the actin cytoskeleton, which is central to cell shape in all plant cells.\n\nAll epithelial cells express the transmembrane adhesion molecule E-cadherin, a cadherin which localises most prominently to the junction between the apical and lateral membranes. The extra-cellular domains of E-cadherin molecules from neighbouring cells bind to one another via a homotypic interaction. The intra-cellular domains of E-cadherin molecules bind to the actin cytoskeleton via the adaptor proteins alpha-catenin and beta-catenin. Thus, E-cadherin forms adherens junctions that connect the actin cytoskeletons of neighbouring cells. Adherens junctions are the primary force-bearing junctions between epithelial cells and are fundamentally important for maintaining epithelial cell shape and for dynamic changes in shape during tissue development. How E-cadherin localizes to the boundary between apical and lateral membranes is not known, but polarized membranes are essential for maintaining E-cadherin at adherens junctions.\n", "id": "22762505", "title": "Epithelial polarity"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31383", "text": "Osmotic pressure\n\nOsmotic pressure is the minimum pressure which needs to be applied to a solution to prevent the inward flow of its pure solvent across a semipermeable membrane. It is also defined as the measure of the tendency of a solution to take in pure solvent (which belongs to the solution under discussion) by osmosis. Potential osmotic pressure is the maximum osmotic pressure that could develop in a solution if it were separated from its pure solvent by a selectively permeable membrane. The phenomenon of osmosis arises from the propensity of a pure solvent to move through a semipermeable membrane and into its solution containing a solute to which the membrane is impermeable. This process is of vital importance in biology as the cell's membrane is semipermeable.\n\nIn order to visualize this effect, imagine a U-shaped tube with equal amounts of water on each side, separated by a water-permeable membrane made from dialysis tubing at its base that is impermeable to sugar molecules. Sugar has been added to the water on one side. The height of the liquid column on that side will then \"rise\" (and that on the other side will \"drop\") proportional to the pressure of the two solutions due to movement of the pure water from the compartment without sugar into the compartment containing the sugar water. This process will stop once the pressures of the water and sugar water on both sides of the membrane become equal.\n\nJacobus van 't Hoff first proposed a \"law\" relating osmotic pressure to solute concentration\nwhere formula_2 is osmotic pressure, \"i\" is the dimensionless van't Hoff index that addresses solute that dissociates an frequently non-idealities, \"M\" is the molar concentration, R is the Ideal gas constant, and \"T\" is the temperature in kelvins. This formula applies when the solute concentration is sufficiently low that the solution can be treated as an ideal solution. The proportionality to concentration means that osmotic pressure is a colligative property. Note the similarity of this formula to the ideal gas law in the form formula_3 where n is the total number of moles of gas molecules in the volume \"V\", and \"n\"/\"V\" is the molar concentration of gas molecules.\n\nvan 't Hoff was the first recipient of the Nobel prize for chemistry for his work on osmotic pressure and chemical equilibrium.\nA simple extension of this equation was proposed by Harmon Northrop Morse and Frazer. \nwhere molal, \"m\",concentration units are used in place of molarity. This formula extends the range of applicability osmotic pressure calculations to more concentrated solutions. However, it is still limited.There are no cases in which the law of van't Hoff or the modified form of this law proposed by Morse and Frazer have been shown to hold at concentrations higher than normal. (In a normal solution in water the fraction of the solute is about 0.02.) Indeed, at very high concentrations van't Hoff's law cannot hold, for the osmotic pressure of a solution approaches infinity as the percentage of solvent approaches zero, while the osmotic pressure calculated from the van't Hoff equation never exceeds a few hundred atmospheres even when we approach the condition of pure solute. On the other hand, it will be shown presently that the law proposed by Morse and Frazer ordinarily gives, at higher concentrations, osmotic pressures far higher than those which actually exist. But often the law of Raoult (and the modified law of Henry) has been shown to hold \"at all concentrations from 0 per cent. to 100 per cent. of solute\", and while in many other cases this law does not hold, the greatest deviations are always found in those cases in which we have reason to believe that the solvent and the solute form complex compounds either with themselves or with each other.The Raoult-Lewis derivation of osmotic pressure further extends concentration range and accuracy of osmotic pressure calculations is derived below and conventional written as,\n\nformula_5,\n\nin modern text where the molal or molarity concentration units are replaced with the negative natural log of the solvent activity, a, divided by the molar volume, \"V\" , of the solvent.\n\nHistorically, van 't Hoff's law and osmotic pressure measurement have been used for the determination molecular weights. The Pfeffer cell was developed for the measurement of osmotic pressure in biology.\n\nOsmotic pressure is an important factor affecting cells. Osmoregulation is the homeostasis mechanism of an organism to reach balance in osmotic pressure.\n\n\nWhen a biological cell is in a hypotonic environment, the cell interior accumulates water, water flows across the cell membrane into the cell, causing it to expand. In plant cells, the cell wall restricts the expansion, resulting in pressure on the cell wall from within called turgor pressure. Turgor pressure allows herbaceous plants to stand upright. It is also the determining factor for how plants regulate the aperture of their stomata. In animal cells excessive osmotic pressure can result in cytolysis.\n\nOsmotic pressure is the basis of filtering (\"reverse osmosis\"), a process commonly used in water purification. The water to be purified is placed in a chamber and put under an amount of pressure greater than the osmotic pressure exerted by the water and the solutes dissolved in it. Part of the chamber opens to a differentially permeable membrane that lets water molecules through, but not the solute particles. The osmotic pressure of ocean water is about 27 atm. Reverse osmosis desalinates fresh water from ocean salt water.\n\nConsider the system at the point when it has reached equilibrium. The condition for this is that the chemical potential of the \"solvent\" (since only it is free to flow toward equilibrium) on both sides of the membrane is equal. The compartment containing the pure solvent has a chemical potential of formula_6, where formula_7 is the pressure. On the other side, in the compartment containing the solute, the chemical potential of the solvent depends on the mole fraction of the solvent, formula_8. Besides, this compartment can assume a different pressure, formula_9. We can therefore write the chemical potential of the solvent as formula_10. If we write formula_11, the balance of the chemical potential is therefore:\n\nHere, the difference in pressure of the two compartments formula_13 is defined as the osmotic pressure exerted by the solutes. Holding the pressure, the addition of solute decreases the chemical potential (an entropic effect). Thus, the pressure of the solution has to be increased in an effort to compensate the loss of the chemical potential.\n\nIn order to find formula_2, the osmotic pressure, we consider equilibrium between a solution containing solute and pure water.\n\nWe can write the left hand side as:\nwhere formula_17 is the activity coefficient of the solvent. The product formula_18 is also known as the activity of the solvent, which for water is the water activity formula_19. The addition to the pressure is expressed through the expression for the energy of expansion:\nwhere formula_21 is the molar volume (m³/mol). Inserting the expression presented above into the chemical potential equation for the entire system and rearranging will arrive at:\n\nIf the liquid is incompressible the molar volume is constant, formula_23, and the integral becomes formula_24. Thus, we get\n\nThe activity coefficient is a function of concentration and temperature, but in the case of dilute mixtures, it is often very close to 1.0, so\n\nFor aqueous solutions of salts, ionisation must be taken into account. For example 1 mole of NaCl ionises to 2 moles of ions.\n\nA general extension of the van 't Hoff equation uses a virial expansion. For an ideal gas this has the form\nwere B, C ... are virial coefficients. A similar expression applies to osmotic pressure with formula_2 in place of pressure, \"p\". Determination of virial coefficients from osmotic coefficients is the main basis for the determination of Pitzer parameters which are used to quantify non-ideal behaviour of solutions of ionic and non-ionic solutes.\n\n\n", "id": "31383", "title": "Osmotic pressure"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19862229", "text": "Microtentacle\n\nMicrotentacles are microtubule-based membrane protrusions that occur in detached cells. They were discovered by scientists studying metastatic breast cancer cells at the University of Maryland, Baltimore.\n\nThese novel structures are distinct from classical actin based extensions of adherent cells, persist for days in breast tumor lines that are resistant to apoptosis, and aid in the reattachment to matrix or cell monolayers.\n\nThe formation of microtentacles (McTNs) in detached or circulating tumor cells may promote seeding of bloodborne metastatic disease.\n\n", "id": "19862229", "title": "Microtentacle"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20651551", "text": "Trichosclereid\n\nTrichosclereids are hard needlelike branched cells found in some species of plants that serve the purpose of protecting the plant from herbivores. They usually are approximately 6 mm long, but in some species they grow to as long as 1 cm.\n\n", "id": "20651551", "title": "Trichosclereid"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20042003", "text": "Voltage-sensitive dye\n\nVoltage-sensitive dyes, also known as potentiometric dyes, are dyes which change their spectral properties in response to voltage changes. They are able to provide linear measurements of firing activity of single neurons, large neuronal populations or activity of myocytes. Many physiological processes are accompanied by changes in cell membrane potential which can be detected with voltage sensitive dyes. Measurements may indicate the site of action potential origin, and measurements of action potential velocity and direction may be obtained.\n\nPotentiometric dyes are used to monitor the electrical activity inside cell organelles where it is not possible to insert an electrode, such as the mitochondria. This technology is especially powerful for the study of patterns of\nactivity in complex multicellular preparations. It also makes possible the\nmeasurement of spatial and temporal variations in membrane potential along the\nsurface of single cells.\n\nFast-response probes: These are amphiphilic membrane staining dyes which usually have a pair of\nhydrocarbon chains acting as membrane anchors and a hydrophilic group which aligns the chromophore\nperpendicular to the membrane/aqueous interface. The chromophore is believed to undergo a large\nelectronic charge shift as a result of excitation from the ground to the excited state and this underlies the\nputative electrochromic mechanism for the sensitivity of these dyes to membrane potential. This molecule (dye) intercalates among the lipophilic part of biological membranes. This orientation assures that the excitation induced\ncharge redistribution will occur parallel to the electric field within the membrane. A change in the\nvoltage across the membrane will therefore cause a spectral shift resulting from a direct interaction\nbetween the field and the ground and excited state dipole moments.\n\nNew voltage dyes can sense voltage with high speed and sensitivity using photoinduced electron transfer (PeT) through a conjugated molecular wire.\n\nSlow-response probes: These exhibit potential-dependent changes in their transmembrane distribution which are accompanied by a fluoresence change. Typical slow-response probes include cationic carbocyanines and rhodamines, and ionic oxonols.\n\nCommonly used voltage sensitive dyes are substituted aminonaphthylethenylpyridinium (ANEP) dyes, such as di-4-ANEPPS, di-8-ANEPPS, and RH237. Depending on their chemical modifications which change their physical properties they are used for different experimental procedures. They were first described in 1985 by the research group of Leslie Loew. ANNINE-6plus is the latest voltage sensitive dye with fast response (ns response time) and high voltage sensitivity. It has been applied to measure the action potentials of a single t-tubule of cardiomyocytes by Guixue Bu et al. A recent computational study confirmed that the ANEP dyes are affected only by the electrostatic environment and not by specific molecular interactions.\n\nThe core material for imaging brain activity with voltage-sensitive dyes are the dyes themselves. These voltage-sensitive dyes are lipophilic and preferably localized in membranes with their hydrophobic tails. They are used in applications involving fluorescence or absorption; they are fast acting and are able to provide linear measurements of changes in membrane potential.\n\nA variety of specialized equipment may be used in conjunction with the dyes, and choices in equipment will vary according to the particularities of a preparation. Essentially, equipment will include specialized microscopes and imaging devices, and may include technical lamps or lasers.\n\nStrengths of imaging brain activity with voltage-sensitive dyes include the following abilities:\n\nWeaknesses of imaging brain activity with voltage-sensitive dyes include the following problems:\n\nVoltage-sensitive dyes have been used to measure neural activity in several areas of the nervous system in a variety of organisms, including the squid giant axon, whisker barrels of the rat somatosensory cortex, olfactory bulb of the salamander, visual cortex of the cat, optic tectum of the frog, and the visual cortex of the rhesus monkey.\n\n", "id": "20042003", "title": "Voltage-sensitive dye"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2775545", "text": "Retromer\n\nRetromer is a complex of proteins that has been shown to be important in recycling transmembrane receptors from endosomes to the \"trans\"-Golgi network (TGN).\n\nRetromer is a heteropentameric complex which in humans is composed of a less defined membrane-associated sorting nexin dimer (SNX1, SNX2, SNX5, SNX6), and a vacuolar protein sorting (Vps) trimer containing Vps26, Vps29, Vps35. Although the SNX dimer is required for the recruitment of retromer to the endosomal membrane, the cargo binding function of this complex is contributed by the core trimer through the binding of Vps35 subunit to various cargo molecules including M6PR wntless and sortilin. Early study on sorting of acid hydrolases such as carboxypeptidase Y (CPY) in S. cerevisiae mutants has led to the identification of retromer in mediating the retrograde trafficking of the pro-CPY receptor (Vps10) from the endosomes to the TGN.\n\nThe retromer complex is highly conserved: homologs have been found in \"C. elegans\", mouse and human. The retromer complex consists of 5 proteins in yeast: Vps35p, Vps26p, Vps29p, Vps17p, Vps5p. The mammalian retromer consists of Vps26, Vps29, Vps35, SNX1 and SNX2, and possibly SNX5 and SNX6. It is proposed to act in two subcomplexes: (1) Cargo recognition complex that consist of Vps35, Vps29 and Vps26 (Vps trimer), and (2) SNX-BAR dimers which consist of SNX1 or SNX2 and SNX5 or SNX6 that facilitates endosomal membrane remodulation and curvature resulting in the formation of tubules/vesicles which transports cargo molecules to the trans-golgi network (TGN).\n\nThe retromer complex has been shown to mediate retrieval of various transmembrane receptors, such as the cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate receptor, the functional mammalian counterpart of Vps10, and the Wnt receptor Wntless. Retromer is required for the recycling of Kex2p and DPAP-A which also cycle between the \"trans\"-Golgi network and a pre-vacuolar (yeast endosome equivalent) compartment in yeast. It is also required for the recycling of the cell surface receptor CED-1, which is necessary for phagocytosis of apoptotic cells.\n\nRetromer plays a central role in the retrieval of several different cargo proteins from the endosome to the \"trans\"-Golgi network. However, it is clear that there are other complexes and proteins that act in this retrieval process. So far it is not clear whether other components that have been identified in the retrieval pathway act with retromer in the same pathway or are involved in alternative pathways. Recent studies have implicated retromer sorting defects in Alzheimer's disease and late-onset Parkinson disease \n\nRetromer also seems to play a role in Hepatitis C Virus replication.\n\nThe association of the Vps35-Vps29-Vps26 complex to the cytosolic domains of cargo molecules endosomal membranes initiates the activation of retrograde trafficking and cargo capture. The nucleation complex was formed through the interaction of VPS complex with GTP-activated Rab7 with clathrin, clathrin-adaptors and various binding proteins.\n\nThe SNX-BAR dimer enters the nucleation complex via direct binding or lateral movement on endosomal surface. The increased level of Retromer SNX-BARs causes a conformational switch to a curvature-inducing mode which initiates membrane tubule formation. Once the cargo carriers are matured, the carrier scission is then catalyzed by dynamin-II or EHD1, together with the mechanical forces generated by actin polymerization and motor activity.\n\nThe cargo carrier is transported to the TGN by motor proteins such as dynein. Tethering of the cargo carrier to the recipient compartment will lead to the uncoating of the carrier which is driven by ATP-hydrolysis and Rab7-GTP hydrolysis. Once released from the carrier, the Vps35-Vps29-Vps26 complex and the SNX-BAR dimers get recycled back onto the endosomal membranes.\n", "id": "2775545", "title": "Retromer"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22787622", "text": "Chemotactic drug-targeting\n\nA special, reversal form of drug delivery where modulation of active migratory behaviour of the target cells is used to achieve targeted effects. The general components of the conjugates are designed as follows: (i) carrier – regularly possessing promoter effect also on internalization into the cell; (ii) chemotactically active ligands acting on the target cells; (iii) drug to be delivered in a selective way and (iv) spacer sequence which joins drug molecule to the carrier and due to it enzyme labile moiety makes possible the intracellular compartment specific release of the drug.\n\nCareful selection of chemotactic component of the ligand not only the chemoattractant character could be expended, however, chemorepellent ligands are also valuable as they are useful to keep away cell populations degrading the conjugate containing the drug.\n\nThis mechanism of drug delivery is currently being studied.\n", "id": "22787622", "title": "Chemotactic drug-targeting"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22198009", "text": "ESIGNET Project\n\nThe ESIGNET Project (Evolving Cell Signaling Networks in Silicon) is an interdisciplinary research consortium that is supported and funded by the European Commission.\n\nScientists and rsearchers at the project are experts at the intersection of computer science and cell biology. Thy apply methods and understandings from evolutionary computation with the goal of studying the computational properties of cell signaling networks. The project's research also has major implications to the fields of nano-technology and intelligent drug delivery.\n\n", "id": "22198009", "title": "ESIGNET Project"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24038918", "text": "Balanced salt solution\n\nA balanced salt solution (BSS) is a solution made to a physiological pH and isotonic salt concentration. Solutions most commonly include sodium, potassium, calcium, magnesium, and chloride. Balanced salt solutions are used for washing tissues and cells and are usually combined with other agents to treat the tissues and cells. They provide the cells with water and inorganic ions, while maintaining a physiological pH and osmotic pressure.\n\nSometimes glucose is added as an energy source and phenol red is used as a pH indicator.\n\nIn medicine, balanced salt solutions can be used as an irrigation solution such as during intraocular surgery and to replace intraocular fluids.\n\n\n\n\n", "id": "24038918", "title": "Balanced salt solution"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24147092", "text": "Beta dispersion\n\nBeta dispersion is the phenomenon associated with the ability of a biological cell membrane to filter out low frequency currents and allow high frequency currents to pass through. It was originally hypothesized by Rudolf Höber in 1910.\n\n", "id": "24147092", "title": "Beta dispersion"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1637666", "text": "Cell disruption\n\nCell disruption is a method or process for releasing biological molecules from inside a cell.\n\nThe production of biologically interesting molecules using cloning and culturing methods allows the study and manufacture of relevant molecules. Except for excreted molecules, cells producing molecules of interest must be disrupted. This page discusses various methods.\n\nA common laboratory-scale mechanical method for cell disruption uses tiny glass, ceramic or steel beads mixed with a sample suspended in aqueous media. First developed by Tim Hopkins in the late 1970s, the sample and bead mix is subjected to high level agitation by stirring or shaking. Beads collide with the cellular sample, cracking open the cell to release intercellular components. Unlike some other methods, mechanical shear is moderate during homogenization resulting in excellent membrane or subcellular preparations. The method, often called \"beadbeating\", works well for all types of cellular material - from spores to animal and plant tissues. It is the most widely used method of yeast lysis, and can yield breakage of over 50%. It has the advantage over other mechanical cell disruption methods of being able to disrupt very small sample sizes, process many samples at a time with no cross-contamination concerns, and does not release potentially harmful aerosols in the process.\n\nIn the simplest example of the method, an equal volume of beads are added to a cell or tissue suspension in a test tube and the sample is vigorously mixed on a common laboratory vortex mixer. While processing times are slow, taking 3-10 times longer than that in specialty shaking machines, it works well for easily disrupted cells and is inexpensive. Process times can be improved by using a bead dispenser to load the beads into the vials or plates. The company LabTIE produces Bead dispensers that dispenses the beads in a grid in only 8 seconds.\n\nIn most laboratories, beadbeating is done in sealed, plastic vials, centrifuge tubes, or deep-well microtiter plates. The sample and tiny beads are agitated at about 2000 oscillations per minute in specially designed vial shakers driven by high power electric motors. Cell disruption is complete in 1–3 minutes of shaking. Machines are available that can process hundreds of samples simultaneously inside deep well microplates.\n\nSuccessful beadbeating is dependent not only design features of the shaking machine (which take into consideration shaking oscillations per minute, shaking throw or distance, shaking orientation and vial orientation), but also the selection of correct bead size (0.1–6 mm diameter), bead composition (glass, ceramic, steel) and bead load in the vial.\n\nAll high energy beadbeating machines warm the sample about 10 degrees/minute. This is due to frictional collisions of the beads during homogenization. Cooling of the sample during or after beadbeating may be necessary to prevent damage to heat sensitive proteins such as enzymes. Sample warming can be controlled by beadbeating for short time intervals with cooling on ice between each interval, by processing vials in pre-chilled aluminum vial holders or by circulating gaseous coolant through the machine during beadbeating.\n\nA different beadbeater configuration, suitable for larger sample volumes, uses a fluorocarbon rotor inside a 15, 50 or 200 ml chamber to agitate the beads. In this configuration, the chamber can be surrounded by a static cooling jacket. Using the same rotor/chamber configuration, large commercial machines are available to process many liters of cell suspension. Currently, these machines are limited to processing monocellular organisms such as yeast, algae and bacteria.\n\nSamples with a tough extracellular matrix, such as animal connective tissue, some tumor biopsy samples, venous tissue, cartilage, seeds, etc., are reduced to a fine powder by impact pulverization at liquid nitrogen temperatures. This technique, known as cryopulverization, is based on the fact that biological samples containing a significant fraction of water become brittle at extremely cold temperatures. This technique was first described by Smucker and Pfister in 1975, who referred to the technique as cryo-impacting. The authors demonstrated cells are effectively broken by this method, confirming by phase and electron microscopy that breakage planes cross cell walls and cytoplasmic membranes.\n\nThe technique can be done by using a mortar and pestle cooled to liquid nitrogen temperatures, but use of this classic apparatus is laborious and sample loss is often a concern. Specialised stainless steel pulverizers generically known as Tissue Pulverizers are also available for this purpose. They require less manual effort, give good sample recovery and are easy to clean between samples.\nAdvantages of this technique are higher yields of proteins and nucleic acids from small, hard tissue samples - especially when used as a preliminary step to mechanical or chemical/solvent cell disruption methods mentioned above.\n\nSince the 1940s high pressure has been used as a method of cell disruption, most notably by the French Pressure Cell Press, or French Press for short. This method was developed by Charles Stacy French and utilises high pressure to force cells through a narrow orifice, causing the cells to lyse due to the shear forces experienced across the pressure differential. While French Presses have become a staple item in many microbiology laboratories, their production has been largely discontinued, leading to a resurgence in alternate applications of similar technology.\n\nModern physical cell disruptors typically operate via either pneumatic or hydraulic pressure. Although pneumatic machines are typically lower cost, their performance can be unreliable due to variations in the processing pressure throughout the stroke of the air pump. It is generally considered that hydraulic machines offer superior lysing ability, especially when processing harder to break samples such as yeast or Gram-positive bacteria, due to their ability to maintain constant pressure throughout the piston stroke. As the French Press, which is operated by hydraulic pressure, is capable of over 90% lysis of most commonly used cell types it is often taken as the gold standard in lysis performance and modern machines are often compared against it not only in terms of lysis efficiency but also in terms of safety and ease of use. Some manufacturers are also trying to improve on the traditional design by altering properties within these machines other than the pressure driving the sample through the orifice. One such example is Constant Systems, who have recently shown that their Cell Disruptors not only match the performance of a traditional French Press, but also that they are striving towards attaining the same results at a much lower power.\n\nPressure Cycling Technology (\"PCT\"). PCT is a patented, enabling technology platform that uses alternating cycles of hydrostatic pressure between ambient and ultra-high levels (up to 90,000 psi) to safely, conveniently and reproducibly control the actions of molecules in biological samples, e.g., the rupture (lysis) of cells and tissues from human, animal, plant, and microbial sources, and the inactivation of pathogens. PCT-enhanced systems (instruments and consumables) address some challenging problems inherent in biological sample preparation. PCT advantages include: (a) extraction and recovery of more membrane proteins, (b) enhanced protein digestion, (c) differential lysis in a mixed sample base, (d) pathogen inactivation, (e) increased DNA detection, and (f) exquisite sample preparation process control.\n\nThis method used for cell disruption strongly influences the physicochemical properties of the lysed cell suspension, such as particle size, viscosity, protein yield and enzyme activity. In recent years the Microfluidizer method has gained popularity in cell disruption due to its ease of use and efficiency at disrupting many different kinds of cells. The Microfluidizer technology was licensed from a company called Arthur D. Little and was first developed and utilized in the 1980s, initially starting as a tool for liposome creation. It has since been used in other applications such as cell disruption nanoemulsions, and solid particle size reduction, among others.\n\nBy using microchannels with fixed geometry, and an intensifier pump, high shear rates are generated that rupture the cells. This method of cell lysis can yield breakage of over 90% of E. coli cells.\n\nMany proteins are extremely temperature-sensitive, and in many cases can start to denature at temperatures of only 4 degrees celsius. Within the microchannels, temperatures exceed 4 degrees celsius, but the machine is designed to cool quickly so that the time the cells are exposed to elevated temperatures is extremely short (residence time 25 ms-40 ms). Because of this effective temperature control, the Microfluidizer yields higher levels of active proteins and enzymes than other mechanical methods when the proteins are temperature-sensitive.\n\nViscosity changes are also often observed when disrupting cells. If the cell suspension viscosity is high, it can make downstream handling—such as filtration and accurate pipetting—quite difficult. The viscosity changes observed with a Microfluidizer are relatively low, and decreases with further additional passes through the machine.\n\nIn contrast to other mechanical disruption methods the Microfluidizer breaks the cell membranes efficiently but gently, resulting in relatively large cell wall fragments (450 nm), and thus making it easier to separate the cell contents. This can lead to shorter filtration times and better centrifugation separation.\n\nMicrofluidizer technology scales from one milliliter to thousands of liters.\n\nFor nitrogen decompression, large quantities of nitrogen are first dissolved in the cell under high pressure within a suitable pressure vessel. Then, when the gas pressure is suddenly released, the nitrogen comes out of the solution as expanding bubbles that stretch the membranes of each cell until they rupture and release the contents of the cell.\n\nNitrogen decompression is more protective of enzymes and organelles than ultrasonic and mechanical homogenizing methods and compares favorably to the controlled disruptive action obtained in a PTFE and glass mortar and pestle homogenizer. While other disruptive methods depend upon friction or a mechanical shearing action that generate heat, the nitrogen decompression procedure is accompanied by an adiabatic expansion that cools the sample instead of heating it.\n\nThe blanket of inert nitrogen gas that saturates the cell suspension and the homogenate offers protection against oxidation of cell components. Although other gases: carbon dioxide, nitrous oxide, carbon monoxide and compressed air have been used in this technique, nitrogen is preferred because of its non-reactive nature and because it does not alter the pH of the suspending medium. In addition, nitrogen is preferred because it is generally available at low cost and at pressures suitable for this procedure.\n\nOnce released, subcellular substances are not exposed to continued attrition that might denature the sample or produce unwanted damage. There is no need to watch for a peak between enzyme activity and percent disruption. Since nitrogen bubbles are generated within each cell, the same disruptive force is applied uniformly throughout the sample, thus ensuring unusual uniformity in the product. Cell-free homogenates can be produced.\n\nThe technique is used to homogenize cells and tissues, release intact organelles, prepare cell membranes, release labile biochemicals, and produce uniform and repeatable homogenates without subjecting the sample to extreme chemical or physical stress.\n\nThe method is particularly well suited for treating mammalian and other membrane-bound cells. It has also been used successfully for treating plant cells, for releasing virus from fertilized eggs and for treating fragile bacteria. It is not recommended for untreated bacterial cells. Yeast, fungus, spores and other materials with tough cell walls do not respond well to this method.\n\n", "id": "1637666", "title": "Cell disruption"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24208018", "text": "Woronin body\n\nA Woronin body (named after the Russian botanist Mikhail Stepanovich Woronin) is a peroxisome-derived, dense core microbody with a unit membrane found near the septae that divide hyphal compartments in filamentous Ascomycota. One established function of Woronin bodies is the plugging of the septal pores after hyphal wounding, which restricts the\nloss of cytoplasm to the sites of injury.\n", "id": "24208018", "title": "Woronin body"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22683587", "text": "Transport by multiple-motor proteins\n\nTransport by molecular motor proteins (Kinesin, Dynein and unconventional Myosin) is essential for cell functioning and survival. Studies of multiple motors are inspired by the fact that multiple motors are involved in many biological processes such as intra-cellular transport and mitosis. This increasing interest in modeling multiple motor transport is particularly due to improved understanding of single motor function. Several models have been proposed in recent year to understand the transport by multiple motors.\n\nModels developed can be broadly divided into two categories (1) mean-field/steady state model and (2) stochastic model. The mean-field model is useful for describing transport by a large group of motors. In mean-field description, fluctuation in the forces that individual motors feel while pulling the cargo is ignored. In stochastic model, fluctuation in the forces that motors feel are not ignored. Steady-state/mean-field model is useful for modeling transport by a large group of motors whereas stochastic model is useful for modeling transport by few motors.\n", "id": "22683587", "title": "Transport by multiple-motor proteins"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=501826", "text": "COPII\n\nCOPII is a coatomer, a type of vesicle coat protein that transports proteins from the rough endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi apparatus. This process is termed anterograde transport, in contrast to the retrograde transport associated with the COPI protein. The name \"COPII\" refers to the specific coat protein complex that initiates the budding process. The coat consists of large protein subcomplexes that are made of four different protein subunits.\n\nThere are two protein heterodimers that form the coat complex. These proteins are\nThese proteins alone are not able to cause the budding of the vesicle or direct the vesicle to the correct target membrane. SNARE, cargo, and other proteins are also needed for these processes to occur. The CopII protein does, however, cause the binding that forms vesicle coat, and thereby causes the release from the ER. The exact process of how the vesicle is brought to a particular location, or how that location is determined is not yet known.\n\nThe GTPase Sar1p is a protein that hydrolyzes GTP and acts like a molecular \"switch\" that flips between an activated and membrane embedded GTP-bound form, and inactive and soluble GDP-bound form. Inactive GDP-bound Sar1p is attracted to the cytosolic side of the endoplasmic reticulum. Sec12, a transmembrane protein found in the ER acts as a Guanine nucleotide exchange factor by stimulating the release of GDP to allow the binding of GTP. Now in a GTP bound state, Sar1p undergoes a conformational change which exposes a hydrophobic tail that can be inserted into the lipid bilayer, binding it to the membrane. Membrane-bound Sar1p recruits the Sec23p/24p complex to form what is collectively known as the pre-budding complex. The pre-budding complex recruits the long, flexible Sec13p/31p complex. Sec13p/31p complexes polymerizes on the cytosolic side of the membrane to form a convex mesh structure. The assembling mesh causes the membrane to bulge outward until a vesicle buds off. Some proteins are found to be responsible for selectively packaging cargos into COPII vesicles. For example, Erv29p in \"Saccharomyces cerevisiae\" is found to be necessary for packaging glycosylated pro-α-factor.\n\nCopII has three specific binding sites that can each be complexed. The picture on the right (Sed5) uses the Sec22 t-SNARE complex to bind. This site is more strongly bound, and therefore is more favored. (Embo)\n\n", "id": "501826", "title": "COPII"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9857129", "text": "Patching and Capping\n\nThe aggregation of fluorescently tagged antibodies that are associated with proteins on membranes of living cells. The aggregation appears as a cap or a patch in the fluorescence microscope and is due to the bivalent nature of antibodies. Patching and capping were critical in demonstrating the fluid nature of plasma membranes.\n\nVariations in density within the specimen are amplified to enhance contrast in unstained cells which is especially useful for examining living unpigmented cells. In other words, phase contrast is a contrast-enhancing optical technique that can be used to produce high contrast images such as living cells and subcellular including nuclei and other organelles. One of the major advantages of using phase contrast microscopy is that living cells can be examined in their natural state without being killed, fixed, or especially stained. As a result, biological processes in the cell can be observed and recorded in high contrast with sharp clarity of minute specimen details.\nWhen the ligand binds to its specific receptor, the ligand-receptor complex accumulates in the coated pits. In many cells these pits and complexes begin to concentrate in one area of a cell. Cytochemically, this appears as patches of label on the cell surface (patching). Eventually, the patches coalesce to form a cap at one pole of the cell (capping). Not all cells form caps, but most do form patches. The pre-concentration process minimizes the amount of fluid that is taken up in the vesicle.\n\n\n\n", "id": "9857129", "title": "Patching and Capping"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28857", "text": "Signal transduction\n\nSignal transduction is the process by which a chemical or physical signal is transmitted through a cell as a series of molecular events, most commonly protein phosphorylation catalysed by protein kinases, which ultimately results in a cellular response. Proteins responsible for detecting stimuli are generally termed receptors, although in some cases the term sensor is used. The changes elicited by ligand binding (or signal sensing) in a receptor give rise to a signaling cascade, which is a chain of biochemical events along a signaling pathway. When signaling pathways interact with one another they form networks, which allow cellular responses to be coordinated, often by combinatorial signaling events. At the molecular level, such responses include changes in the transcription or translation of genes, and post-translational and conformational changes in proteins, as well as changes in their location. These molecular events are the basic mechanisms controlling cell growth, proliferation, metabolism and many other processes. In multicellular organisms, signal transduction pathways have evolved to regulate cell communication in a wide variety of ways.\n\nEach component (or node) of a signaling pathway is classified according to the role it plays with respect to the initial stimulus. Ligands are termed \"first messengers\", while receptors are the \"signal transducers\", which then activate \"primary effectors\". Such effectors are often linked to second messengers, which can activate \"secondary effectors\", and so on. Depending on the efficiency of the nodes, a signal can be amplified (a concept known as signal gain), so that one signaling molecule can generate a response involving hundreds to millions of molecules. As with other signals, the transduction of biological signals is characterised by delay, noise, signal feedback and feedforward and interference, which can range from negligible to pathological. With the advent of computational biology, the analysis of signaling pathways and networks has become an essential tool to understand cellular functions and disease, including signaling rewiring mechanisms underlying responses to acquired drug resistance.\n\nThe basis for signal transduction is the transformation of a certain stimulus into a biochemical signal. The nature of such stimuli can vary widely, ranging from extracellular cues, such as the presence of EGF, to intracellular events, such as the DNA damage resulting from replicative telomere attrition. Traditionally, signals that reach the central nervous system are classified as senses. These are transmitted from neuron to neuron in a process called synaptic transmission. Many other intercellular signal relay mechanisms exist in multicellular organisms, such as those that govern embryonic development.\n\nThe majority of signal transduction pathways involve the binding of signaling molecules, known as ligands, to receptors that trigger events inside the cell. The binding of a signaling molecule with a receptor causes a change in the conformation of the receptor, known as \"receptor activation\". Most ligands are soluble molecules from the extracellular medium which bind to cell surface receptors. These include growth factors, cytokines and neurotransmitters. Components of the extracellular matrix such as fibronectin and hyaluronan can also bind to such receptors (integrins and CD44, respectively). In addition, some molecules such as steroid hormones are lipid-soluble and thus cross the plasma membrane to reach nuclear receptors. In the case of steroid hormone receptors, their stimulation leads to binding to the promoter region of steroid-responsive genes.\n\nNot all classifications of signaling molecules take into account the molecular nature of each class member. For example, odorants belong to a wide range of molecular classes, as do neurotransmitters, which range in size from small molecules such as dopamine to neuropeptides such as endorphins. Moreover, some molecules may fit into more than one class, e.g. epinephrine is a neurotransmitter when secreted by the central nervous system and a hormone when secreted by the adrenal medulla.\n\nSome receptors such as HER2 are capable of ligand-independent activation when overexpressed or mutated. This leads to constituitive activation of the pathway, which may or may not be overturned by compensation mechanisms. In the case of HER2, which acts as a dimerization partner of other EGFRs, constituitive activation leads to hyperproliferation and cancer.\n\nThe prevalence of basement membranes in the tissues of Eumetazoans means that most cell types require attachment to survive. This requirement has led to the development of complex mechanotransduction pathways, allowing cells to sense the stiffness of the substratum. Such signaling is mainly orchestrated in focal adhesions, regions where the integrin-bound actin cytoskeleton detects changes and transmits them downstream through YAP1. Calcium-dependent cell adhesion molecules such as cadherins and selectins can also mediate mechanotransduction. Specialised forms of mechanotransduction within the nervous system are responsible for mechanosensation: hearing, touch, proprioception and balance.\n\nCellular and systemic control of osmotic pressure (the difference in osmolarity between the cytosol and the extracellular medium) is critical for homeostasis. There are three ways in which cells can detect osmotic stimuli: as changes in macromolecular crowding, ionic strength, and changes in the properties of the plasma membrane or cytoskeleton (the latter being a form of mechanotransduction). These changes are detected by proteins known as osmosensors or osmoreceptors. In humans, the best characterised osmosensors are transient receptor potential channels present in the primary cilium of human cells. In yeast, the HOG pathway has been extensively characterised.\n\nThe sensing of temperature in cells is known as thermoception and is primarily mediated by transient receptor potential channels. Additionally, animal cells contain a conserved mechanism to prevent high temperatures from causing cellular damage, the heat-shock response. Such response is triggered when high temperatures cause the dissociation of inactive HSF1 from complexes with heat shock proteins Hsp40/Hsp70 and Hsp90. With help from the ncRNA \"hsr1\", HSF1 then trimerizes, becoming active and upregulating the expression of its target genes. Many other thermosensory mechanisms exist in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes.\n\nIn mammals, light controls the sense of sight and the circadian clock by activating light-sensitive proteins in photoreceptor cells in the eye's retina. In the case of vision, light is detected by rhodopsin in rod and cone cells. In the case of the circadian clock, a different photopigment, melanopsin, is responsible for detecting light in intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells.\n\nReceptors can be roughly divided into two major classes: intracellular and extracellular receptors.\n\nExtracellular receptors are integral transmembrane proteins and make up most receptors. They span the plasma membrane of the cell, with one part of the receptor on the outside of the cell and the other on the inside. Signal transduction occurs as a result of a ligand binding to the outside region of the receptor (the ligand does not pass through the membrane). Ligand-receptor binding induces a change in the conformation of the inside part of the receptor, a process sometimes called \"receptor activation\". This results in either the activation of an enzyme domain of the receptor or the exposure of a binding site for other intracellular signaling proteins within the cell, eventually propagating the signal through the cytoplasm.\n\nIn eukaryotic cells, most intracellular proteins activated by a ligand/receptor interaction possess an enzymatic activity; examples include tyrosine kinase and phosphatases. Often such enzymes are covalently linked to the receptor. Some of them create second messengers such as cyclic AMP and IP, the latter controlling the release of intracellular calcium stores into the cytoplasm. Other activated proteins interact with adaptor proteins that facilitate signaling protein interactions and coordination of signaling complexes necessary to respond to a particular stimulus. Enzymes and adaptor proteins are both responsive to various second messenger molecules.\n\nMany adaptor proteins and enzymes activated as part of signal transduction possess specialized protein domains that bind to specific secondary messenger molecules. For example, calcium ions bind to the EF hand domains of calmodulin, allowing it to bind and activate calmodulin-dependent kinase. PIP and other phosphoinositides do the same thing to the Pleckstrin homology domains of proteins such as the kinase protein AKT.\n\nG protein–coupled receptors (GPCRs) are a family of integral transmembrane proteins that possess seven transmembrane domains and are linked to a heterotrimeric G protein. With nearly 800 members, this is the largest family of membrane proteins and receptors in mammals. Counting all animal species, they add up to over 5000. Mammalian GPCRs are classified into 5 major families: rhodopsin-like, secretin-like, metabotropic glutamate, adhesion and frizzled/smoothened, with a few GPCR groups being difficult to classify due to low sequence similarity, e.g. vomeronasal receptors. Other classes exist in eukaryotes, such as the \"Dictyostelium\" cyclic AMP receptors and fungal mating pheromone receptors.\n\nSignal transduction by a GPCR begins with an inactive G protein coupled to the receptor; the G protein exists as a heterotrimer consisting of Gα, Gβ, and Gγ subunits. Once the GPCR recognizes a ligand, the conformation of the receptor changes to activate the G protein, causing Gα to bind a molecule of GTP and dissociate from the other two G-protein subunits. The dissociation exposes sites on the subunits that can interact with other molecules. The activated G protein subunits detach from the receptor and initiate signaling from many downstream effector proteins such as phospholipases and ion channels, the latter permitting the release of second messenger molecules. The total strength of signal amplification by a GPCR is determined by the lifetimes of the ligand-receptor complex and receptor-effector protein complex and the deactivation time of the activated receptor and effectors through intrinsic enzymatic activity; e.g. via protein kinase phosphorylation or b-arrestin-dependent internalization.\n\nA study was conducted where a point mutation was inserted into the gene encoding the chemokine receptor CXCR2; mutated cells underwent a malignant transformation due to the expression of CXCR2 in an active conformation despite the absence of chemokine-binding. This meant that chemokine receptors can contribute to cancer development.\n\nReceptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) are transmembrane proteins with an intracellular kinase domain and an extracellular domain that binds ligands; examples include growth factor receptors such as the insulin receptor. To perform signal transduction, RTKs need to form dimers in the plasma membrane; the dimer is stabilized by ligands binding to the receptor. The interaction between the cytoplasmic domains stimulates the autophosphorylation of tyrosine residues within the intracellular kinase domains of the RTKs, causing conformational changes. Subsequent to this, the receptors' kinase domains are activated, initiating phosphorylation signaling cascades of downstream cytoplasmic molecules that facilitate various cellular processes such as cell differentiation and metabolism. Many Ser/Thr and dual-specificity protein kinases are important for signal transduction, either acting downstream of [receptor tyrosine kinases], or as membrane-embedded or cell-soluble versions in their own right. The process of signal transduction involves around 560 known protein kinases and pseudokinases, encoded by the human kinome \n\nAs is the case with GPCRs, proteins that bind GTP play a major role in signal transduction from the activated RTK into the cell. In this case, the G proteins are members of the Ras, Rho, and Raf families, referred to collectively as small G proteins. They act as molecular switches usually tethered to membranes by isoprenyl groups linked to their carboxyl ends. Upon activation, they assign proteins to specific membrane subdomains where they participate in signaling. Activated RTKs in turn activate small G proteins that activate guanine nucleotide exchange factors such as SOS1. Once activated, these exchange factors can activate more small G proteins, thus amplifying the receptor's initial signal. The mutation of certain RTK genes, as with that of GPCRs, can result in the expression of receptors that exist in a constitutively activated state; such mutated genes may act as oncogenes.\n\nHistidine-specific protein kinases are structurally distinct from other protein kinases and are found in prokaryotes, fungi, and plants as part of a two-component signal transduction mechanism: a phosphate group from ATP is first added to a histidine residue within the kinase, then transferred to an aspartate residue on a receiver domain on a different protein or the kinase itself, thus activating the aspartate residue.\n\nIntegrins are produced by a wide variety of cells; they play a role in cell attachment to other cells and the extracellular matrix and in the transduction of signals from extracellular matrix components such as fibronectin and collagen. Ligand binding to the extracellular domain of integrins changes the protein's conformation, clustering it at the cell membrane to initiate signal transduction. Integrins lack kinase activity; hence, integrin-mediated signal transduction is achieved through a variety of intracellular protein kinases and adaptor molecules, the main coordinator being integrin-linked kinase. As shown in the adjacent picture, cooperative integrin-RTK signaling determines the timing of cellular survival, apoptosis, proliferation, and differentiation.\n\nImportant differences exist between integrin-signaling in circulating blood cells and non-circulating cells such as epithelial cells; integrins of circulating cells are normally inactive. For example, cell membrane integrins on circulating leukocytes are maintained in an inactive state to avoid epithelial cell attachment; they are activated only in response to stimuli such as those received at the site of an inflammatory response. In a similar manner, integrins at the cell membrane of circulating platelets are normally kept inactive to avoid thrombosis. Epithelial cells (which are non-circulating) normally have active integrins at their cell membrane, helping maintain their stable adhesion to underlying stromal cells that provide signals to maintain normal functioning.\n\nIn plants, there are no bona fide integrin receptors identified to date; nevertheless, several integrin-like proteins were proposed based on structural homology with the metazoan receptors. Interestingly, plants contain integrin-linked kinases that are very similar in their primary structure with the animal ILKs. In the experimental model plant \"Arabidopsis thaliana\", one of the integrin-linked kinase genes, \"ILK1\", has been shown to be a critical element in the plant immune response to signal molecules from bacterial pathogens and plant sensitivity to salt and osmotic stress. ILK1 protein interacts with the high-affinity potassium transporter HAK5 and with the calcium sensor CML9.\n\nWhen activated, toll-like receptors (TLRs) take adapter molecules within the cytoplasm of cells in order to propagate a signal. Four adaptor molecules are known to be involved in signaling, which are Myd88, TIRAP, TRIF, and TRAM. These adapters activate other intracellular molecules such as IRAK1, IRAK4, TBK1, and IKKi that amplify the signal, eventually leading to the induction or suppression of genes that cause certain responses. Thousands of genes are activated by TLR signaling, implying that this method constitutes an important gateway for gene modulation.\n\nA ligand-gated ion channel, upon binding with a ligand, changes conformation to open a channel in the cell membrane through which ions relaying signals can pass. An example of this mechanism is found in the receiving cell of a neural synapse. The influx of ions that occurs in response to the opening of these channels induces action potentials, such as those that travel along nerves, by depolarizing the membrane of post-synaptic cells, resulting in the opening of voltage-gated ion channels.\n\nAn example of an ion allowed into the cell during a ligand-gated ion channel opening is Ca; it acts as a second messenger initiating signal transduction cascades and altering the physiology of the responding cell. This results in amplification of the synapse response between synaptic cells by remodelling the dendritic spines involved in the synapse.\n\nIntracellular receptors, such as nuclear receptors and cytoplasmic receptors, are soluble proteins localized within their respective areas. The typical ligands for nuclear receptors are non-polar hormones like the steroid hormones testosterone and progesterone and derivatives of vitamins A and D. To initiate signal transduction, the ligand must pass through the plasma membrane by passive diffusion. On binding with the receptor, the ligands pass through the nuclear membrane into the nucleus, altering gene expression.\n\nActivated nuclear receptors attach to the DNA at receptor-specific hormone-responsive element (HRE) sequences, located in the promoter region of the genes activated by the hormone-receptor complex. Due to their enabling gene transcription, they are alternatively called inductors of gene expression. All hormones that act by regulation of gene expression have two consequences in their mechanism of action; their effects are produced after a characteristically long period of time and their effects persist for another long period of time, even after their concentration has been reduced to zero, due to a relatively slow turnover of most enzymes and proteins that would either deactivate or terminate ligand binding onto the receptor.\n\nNucleic receptors have DNA-binding domains containing zinc fingers and a ligand-binding domain; the zinc fingers stabilize DNA binding by holding its phosphate backbone. DNA sequences that match the receptor are usually hexameric repeats of any kind; the sequences are similar but their orientation and distance differentiate them. The ligand-binding domain is additionally responsible for dimerization of nucleic receptors prior to binding and providing structures for transactivation used for communication with the translational apparatus.\n\nSteroid receptors are a subclass of nuclear receptors located primarily within the cytosol. In the absence of steroids, they associate in an aporeceptor complex containing chaperone or heatshock proteins (HSPs). The HSPs are necessary to activate the receptor by assisting the protein to fold in a way such that the signal sequence enabling its passage into the nucleus is accessible. Steroid receptors, on the other hand, may be repressive on gene expression when their transactivation domain is hidden. Receptor activity can be enhanced by phosphorylation of serine residues at their N-terminal as a result of another signal transduction pathway, a process called crosstalk.\n\nRetinoic acid receptors are another subset of nuclear receptors. They can be activated by an endocrine-synthesized ligand that entered the cell by diffusion, a ligand synthesised from a precursor like retinol brought to the cell through the bloodstream or a completely intracellularly synthesised ligand like prostaglandin. These receptors are located in the nucleus and are not accompanied by HSPs. They repress their gene by binding to their specific DNA sequence when no ligand binds to them, and vice versa.\n\nCertain intracellular receptors of the immune system are cytoplasmic receptors; recently identified NOD-like receptors (NLRs) reside in the cytoplasm of some eukaryotic cells and interact with ligands using a leucine-rich repeat (LRR) motif similar to TLRs. Some of these molecules like NOD2 interact with RIP2 kinase that activates NF-κB signaling, whereas others like NALP3 interact with inflammatory caspases and initiate processing of particular cytokines like interleukin-1β.\n\nFirst messengers are the signaling molecules (hormones, neurotransmitters, and paracrine/autocrine agents) that reach the cell from the extracellular fluid and bind to their specific receptors. Second messengers are the substances that enter the cytoplasm and act within the cell to trigger a response. In essence, second messengers serve as chemical relays from the plasma membrane to the cytoplasm, thus carrying out intracellular signal transduction.\n\nThe release of calcium ions from the endoplasmic reticulum into the cytosol results in its binding to signaling proteins that are then activated; it is then sequestered in the smooth endoplasmic reticulum and the mitochondria. Two combined receptor/ion channel proteins control the transport of calcium: the InsP-receptor that transports calcium upon interaction with inositol triphosphate on its cytosolic side; and the ryanodine receptor named after the alkaloid ryanodine, similar to the InsP receptor but having a feedback mechanism that releases more calcium upon binding with it. The nature of calcium in the cytosol means that it is active for only a very short time, meaning its free state concentration is very low and is mostly bound to organelle molecules like calreticulin when inactive.\n\nCalcium is used in many processes including muscle contraction, neurotransmitter release from nerve endings, and cell migration. The three main pathways that lead to its activation are GPCR pathways, RTK pathways, and gated ion channels; it regulates proteins either directly or by binding to an enzyme.\n\nLipophilic second messenger molecules are derived from lipids residing in cellular membranes; enzymes stimulated by activated receptors activate the lipids by modifying them. Examples include diacylglycerol and ceramide, the former required for the activation of protein kinase C.\n\nNitric oxide (NO) acts as a second messenger because it is a free radical that can diffuse through the plasma membrane and affect nearby cells. It is synthesised from arginine and oxygen by the NO synthase and works through activation of soluble guanylyl cyclase, which when activated produces another second messenger, cGMP. NO can also act through covalent modification of proteins or their metal co-factors; some have a redox mechanism and are reversible. It is toxic in high concentrations and causes damage during stroke, but is the cause of many other functions like relaxation of blood vessels, apoptosis, and penile erections.\n\nIn addition to nitric oxide, other electronically activated species are also signal-transducing agents in a process called redox signaling. Examples include superoxide, hydrogen peroxide, carbon monoxide, and hydrogen sulfide. Redox signaling also includes active modulation of electronic flows in semiconductive biological macromolecules.\n\nGene activations and metabolism alterations are examples of cellular responses to extracellular stimulation that require signal transduction. Gene activation leads to further cellular effects, since the products of responding genes include instigators of activation; transcription factors produced as a result of a signal transduction cascade can activate even more genes. Hence, an initial stimulus can trigger the expression of a large number of genes, leading to physiological events like the increased uptake of glucose from the blood stream and the migration of neutrophils to sites of infection. The set of genes and their activation order to certain stimuli is referred to as a genetic program.\n\nMammalian cells require stimulation for cell division and survival; in the absence of growth factor, apoptosis ensues. Such requirements for extracellular stimulation are necessary for controlling cell behavior in unicellular and multicellular organisms; signal transduction pathways are perceived to be so central to biological processes that a large number of diseases are attributed to their disregulation.\nThree basic signals determine cellular growth:\nThe combination of these signals are integrated in an altered cytoplasmic machinery which leads to altered cell behaviour.\n\nFollowing are some major signaling pathways, demonstrating how ligands binding to their receptors can affect second messengers and eventually result in altered cellular responses.\n\n\nThe earliest notion of signal transduction can be traced back to 1855, when Claude Bernard proposed that ductless glands such as the spleen, the thyroid and adrenal glands, were responsible for the release of \"internal secretions\" with physiological effects. Bernard's \"secretions\" were later named \"hormones\" by Ernest Starling in 1905. Together with William Bayliss, Starling had discovered secretin in 1902. Although many other hormones, most notably insulin, were discovered in the following years, the mechanisms remained largely unknown.\n\nThe discovery of nerve growth factor by Rita Levi-Montalcini in 1954, and epidermal growth factor by Stanley Cohen in 1962, led to more detailed insights into the molecular basis of cell signaling, in particular growth factors. Their work, together with Earl Wilbur Sutherland's discovery of cyclic AMP in 1956, prompted the redefinition of endocrine signaling to include only signaling from glands, while the terms autocrine and paracrine began to be used. Sutherland was awarded the 1971 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, while Levi-Montalcini and Cohen shared it in 1986.\n\nIn 1970, Martin Rodbell examined the effects of glucagon on a rat's liver cell membrane receptor. He noted that guanosine triphosphate disassociated glucagon from this receptor and stimulated the G-protein, which strongly influenced the cell's metabolism. Thus, he deduced that the G-protein is a transducer that accepts glucagon molecules and affects the cell. For this, he shared the 1994 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine with Alfred G. Gilman. Thus, the characterization of RTKs and GPCRs led to the formulation of the concept of \"signal transduction\", a word first used in 1972. Some early articles used the terms \"signal transmission\" and \"sensory transduction\". In 2007, a total of 48,377 scientific papers—including 11,211 review papers—were published on the subject. The term first appeared in a paper's title in 1979. Widespread use of the term has been traced to a 1980 review article by Rodbell: Research papers focusing on signal transduction first appeared in large numbers in the late 1980s and early 1990s.\n\n\n", "id": "28857", "title": "Signal transduction"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8307294", "text": "Cell culture assay\n\nIn biomaterials testing, a cell culture assay is any method which is used to assess the cytotoxicity of a material. This refers to the \"in vitro\" assessment of material to determine whether it releases toxic chemicals in sufficient quantities to kill cells either directly or indirectly through the inhibition of cell metabolic pathways. Cell culture evaluations are the precursor to whole animal studies and are a way to determine if significant cytotoxicity exists for the given material. Cell culture assays are standardized by ASTM, ISO, and BSI (British Standards Institution.)\n\n\n\n\nEach method has its own advantages and disadvantages, and some are more suitable for certain applications than others. For example the direct contact method offers conditions which are most similar to the physiological environment but the cells are susceptible to trauma if the material moves. The agar diffusion method is good for materials with high densities and offers an even concentration gradient for potential toxicants, but there is a serious risk of the cells going into thermal shock when they are overlaid with agar. The elution method is best for applications which might require extra incubation time, but additional time and steps are required for preparing such a test.\n\n\"In vitro\" biomaterials testing yields fundamental information about the behaviour of materials in contact with living cells, but cannot qualify or even accurately predict the performance of a material \"in vivo\".\n", "id": "8307294", "title": "Cell culture assay"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11026468", "text": "Antigenic escape\n\nAntigenic escape occurs when the immune system is unable to respond to an infectious agent. This means that the response mechanisms a host's immune system normally utilizes to recognize and eliminate a virus or pathogen is no longer able to do so. This process can occur in a number of different mechanisms of both genetic and environmental nature. Such mechanisms include homologous recombination, and manipulation and resistance of the host's immune responses.\n\nDifferent antigens are able to escape through a variety of mechanisms. For example, the African trypanosome parasites are able to clear the host's antibodies, as well as resist lysis and inhibit parts of the innate immune response. Another bacteria, \"Bordetella pertussis\", is able to escape the immune response by inhibiting neutrophils and macrophages from invading the infection site early on. One cause of antigenic escape is that a pathogen's epitopes (the binding sites for immune cells) become too similar to a person's naturally occurring MHC-1 epitopes. The immune system becomes unable to distinguish the infection from self-cells.\n\nAntigenic escape is not only crucial for resistance of a host's natural immune response, but also for the resistance against vaccinations. The problem of antigenic escape has greatly deterred the process of creating new vaccines. Because vaccines generally cover a small ratio of strains of one virus, the recombination of antigenic DNA that lead to diverse pathogens allows these invaders to resist even newly developed vaccinations. Some antigens may even target pathways different than those the vaccine had originally intended to target. Recent research on many vaccines, including the malaria vaccine, has focused on how to anticipate this diversity and create vaccinations that can cover a broader spectrum of antigenic variation.\n\nThe most common of antigenic escape mechanisms, homologous recombination, can be seen in a wide variety of bacterial pathogens, including \"Helicobacter pylori\", a bacterium that infects the human stomach. While a host's homologous recombination can act as a defense mechanisms for fixing DNA double stranded breaks (DSBs), it can also create changes in antigenic DNA that can create new, unrecognizable proteins that allow the antigen to escape recognition by the host's immune response. Through the recombination of \"H. pylori's\" outer membrane proteins, immunoglobulins can no longer recognize these new structures and, therefore, cannot attack the antigen as part of the normal immune response.\n\nAfrican trypanosomes are parasites that are able to escape the immune responses of its host animal through a range of mechanisms. Its most prevalent mechanism is its ability to evade recognition by antibodies through antigenic variation. This is achieved through the switching of its variant surface glycoprotein or VSG, a substance that coats the entire antigen. When this coat is recognized by an antibody, the parasite can be cleared. However, variation of this coat can lead to antibodies being unable to recognize and clear the antigen. In addition to this, the VSG coat is able to clear the antibodies themselves to escape their clearing function.\n\nTrypanosomes are also able to achieve evasion through the mediation of the host's immune response. Through the conversion of ATP to cAMP by the enzyme adenylate cyclase, the production of TNF-α, a signaling cytokine important for inducing inflammation, is inhibited in liver myeloid cells. In addition, trypanosomes are able to weaken the immune system by inducing B cell apoptosis (cell death) and the degradation of B cell lymphopoiesis. They are also able to induce suppressor molecules that can inhibit T cell reproduction.\n\nMany head and neck cancers are able to escape immune responses in a variety of ways. Once such example is through the production of pro-inflammatory and immunosuppressive cytokines. This can be achieved when the tumor recruits immunosuppressive cell subsets into the tumor's environment. Such cells include pro-tumor M2 macrophages, myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs), Th-2 polarized CD4 T-lymphocytes, and regulatory T-lymphocytes. These cells can then limit the responses of T cells through the production of cytokines and by releasing immune-modulating enzymes.\n\nWhile vaccines are created to strengthen the immune response to pathogens, in many cases these vaccines are not able to cover the wide variety of strains a pathogen may have. Instead they may only protect against one or two strains, leading to the escape of strains not covered by the vaccine. This results in the pathogens being able to attack targets of the immune system different than those intended to be targeted by the vaccination. This parasitic antigen diversity is particularly troublesome for the development of the malaria vaccines.\n\nIn order to fix this problem, vaccines must be able to cover the wide variety of strains within a bacterial population. In recent research of \"Neisseria meningitidis\", the possibility of such broad coverage may be achieved through the combination of multi-component polysaccharide conjugate vaccines. However, in order to further improve upon broadening the scope of vaccinations, epidemiological surveillance must be conducted to better detect the variation of escape mutants and their spread.\n", "id": "11026468", "title": "Antigenic escape"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7971649", "text": "NUN buffer\n\nNUN buffer is a solution that makes it possible to purify proteins located in the nucleus of eukaryotic cells. Although other procedures are available they result in loss of albumin D-box binding protein (DBP) which is unwanted if nuclear signal pathways are to be investigated. Therefore, a new extraction procedure was developed in 1993 to increase recovery of nonhistone proteins using a (NUN) solution containing 0.3 M NaCl, 1 M urea, and 1% nonionic detergent Nonidet P-40, which destabilize salt bridges, hydrogen bonds, and hydrophobic interactions, respectively; resulting in a disruption of interaction between proteins and DNA. By incubating nuclei in NUN buffer and centrifuging the solution, the supernatant will therefore contain nuclear proteins.\n\nNUN buffer contains: HEPES [pH 7.6], Urea, NaCl, DDT, PIC 1 & 2, 1.1% NP-40, Sodium orthovanadate, β-glycerol phosphate and water.\n", "id": "7971649", "title": "NUN buffer"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24428035", "text": "Alpha oxidation\n\nAlpha-oxidation of phytanic acid is believed to take place entirely within peroxisomes. \n(Propionyl-CoA is released as a result of beta oxidation when the beta carbon is substituted)\n\nEnzymatic deficiency in alpha-oxidation (most frequently in phytanoyl-CoA dioxygenase) leads to Refsum's disease, in which the accumulation of phytanic acid and its derivatives leads to neurological damage. Other disorders of peroxisome biogenesis also prevent alpha-oxidation from occurring.\n\n", "id": "24428035", "title": "Alpha oxidation"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24666773", "text": "FlowJo\n\nFlowJo is a software package for analyzing flow cytometry data. Files produced by modern flow cytometers are written in the Flow Cytometry Standard format with an .fcs file extension. FlowJo will import and analyze cytometry data regardless of which FACS (Fluorescence Activated Cell Sorting) machine is used to collect the data.\n\nIn FlowJo, samples are organized in a \"Workspace\" window, which presents a hierarchical view of all the samples and their analyses (gates and statistics). Viewing an entire experiment in a Workspace permits organizing and managing complex cytometry experiments and produces detailed graphical reports. FlowJo's ability to automate repetitive operations facilitates the production of statistics tables and graphical reports when the experiment involves many samples, parameters and/or operations.\n\nWithin a workspace, samples can be grouped or sorted by various attributes such as the panel of antibodies with which they are stained, tissue type, or patient from whom they came. When an operation on a group is initiated, FlowJo can perform the same operation on every sample belonging to that group. Thus, you can apply a gate to a sample, copy it to the group, and that gate will be automatically placed on all samples in the group.\n\nFlowJo provides tools for the creation of:\n\nFlowJo became a commercial product in 1996. In 2002, Tree Star released a Windows version. FlowJo is currently developed by FlowJo LLC, a privately owned life sciences software company based in Ashland, Oregon. \n\n", "id": "24666773", "title": "FlowJo"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23908239", "text": "Nuage (cell biology)\n\nNuage is a specific term for \"Drosophila melanogaster\" germline granules. Nuage are the hallmark of \"Drosophila melanogaster\" germline cells, which have an electron-dense perinuclear structure and can silence the selfish genetic elements in \"Drosophila melanogaster\". The term 'Nuage' comes from the French word for 'cloud', as they appear as nebulous electron-dense bodies by electron microscopy. They are found in nurse cells of the developing \"Drosophila melanogaster\" egg chamber and are composed of various types of proteins, including RNA-helicases, Tudor domain proteins, Piwi-clade Argonaute proteins, in addition to a PRMT5 methylosome composed of Capsuléen and its co-factor, Valois (MEP50).\n\nSee piRNA for more information.\n", "id": "23908239", "title": "Nuage (cell biology)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15632707", "text": "Intrinsic immunity\n\nIntrinsic immunity refers to a set of recently discovered cellular-based anti-viral defense mechanisms, notably genetically encoded proteins which specifically target eukaryotic retroviruses. Unlike adaptive and innate immunity effectors, intrinsic immune proteins are usually expressed at a constant level, allowing a viral infection to be halted quickly.\n\nEukaryotic organisms have been exposed to viral infections for millions of years. The development of the innate and adaptive immune system reflects the evolutionary importance of fighting infection. Some viruses, however, have proven to be so deadly or refractory to conventional immune mechanisms that specific, genetically encoded cellular defense mechanisms have evolved to combat them. Intrinsic immunity comprises cellular proteins which are always active and have evolved to block infection by specific viruses or viral taxa.\n\nThe recognition of intrinsic immunity as a potent anti-viral defense mechanism is a recent discovery and is not yet discussed in most immunology courses or texts. Though the extent of protection intrinsic immunity affords is still unknown, it is possible that intrinsic immunity may eventually be considered a third branch of the traditionally bipartite immune system.\n\nIntrinsic Immunity combines aspects of the two traditional branches of the immune system - adaptive and innate immunity – but is mechanistically distinct. Innate cellular immunity recognizes viral infection using toll-like receptors (TLRs), or pattern recognition receptors, which sense Pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), triggering the expression of nonspecific antiviral proteins. Intrinsic immune proteins, however, are specific both in virus recognition and their mechanism of viral attenuation. Like innate immunity, however, the intrinsic immune system does not respond differently upon repeat infection by the same pathogen. Also, like adaptive immunity, intrinsic immunity is specifically tailored to a single type or class of pathogens, notably retroviruses.\n\nUnlike adaptive and innate immunity, which must sense the infection to be turned on (and can take weeks to become effective in the case of adaptive immunity) intrinsic immune proteins are constitutively expressed and ready to shut down infection immediately following viral entry. This is particularly important in retroviral infections since viral integration into the host genome occurs quickly after entry and reverse transcription and is largely irreversible.\n\nBecause the production of intrinsic immune mediating proteins cannot be increased during infection, these defenses can become saturated and ineffective if a cell is infected with a high level of virus.\n\n\nOther intrinsic immune proteins have been discovered which block Murine leukemia virus (MLV), Herpes simplex virus (HSV), and Human Cytomegalovirus (HCMV). In many cases, such as that of APOBEC3G above, viruses have evolved mechanisms for disrupting the actions of these proteins. Another example is the cellular protein Daxx, which silences viral promoters, but is degraded by an active HCMV protein early in infection.\n", "id": "15632707", "title": "Intrinsic immunity"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22866537", "text": "Von Kossa stain\n\nThe von Kossa stain is used to quantify mineralization in cell culture and tissue sections.\n\nThe method was originally developed by von Kossa, and underwent several modifications. The stain principle is a precipitation reaction in which silver ions react with phosphate (not calcium) in the presence of acidic material Photochemical degradation of silver phosphate to silver then occurs under light illumination.\nThis method is not specific for calcium itself but tissues are treated with a silver nitrate solution and the silver is deposited by replacing the calcium reduced by the strong light, and so can be visualized as metallic silver.\nAdditional methods need to be employed to confirm the presence of calcium, such as Alizarin Red, which detects calcium deposits.\n", "id": "22866537", "title": "Von Kossa stain"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4648752", "text": "Hemangioblast\n\nHemangioblast are the multipotent precursor cells that can differentiate into both hematopoietic and endothelial cells. In the mouse embryo, the emergence of blood islands in the yolk sac at embryonic day 7 marks the onset of hematopoiesis. From these blood islands, the hematopoietic cells and vasculature are formed shortly after. Hemangioblasts are the progenitors that form the blood islands. To date, the hemangioblast has been identified in human, mouse and zebrafish embryos.\n\nHemangioblasts have been first extracted from embryonic cultures and manipulated by cytokines to differentiate along either hematopoietic or endothelial route. It has been shown that these pre-endothelial/pre-hematopoietic cells in the embryo arise out of a phenotype CD34 population. It was then found that hemangioblasts are also present in the tissue of post-natal individuals, such as in newborn infants and adults.\n\nThe hemangioblast was first hypothesized in 1900 by Wilhelm His. Existence of the hemangioblast was first proposed in 1917 by Florence Sabin, who observed the close spatial and temporal proximity of the emergence of blood vessels and red blood cells within the yolk sac in chick embryos. In 1932, making the same observation as Sabin, Murray coined the term “hemangioblast”.\n\nThe hypothesis of a bipotential precursor was further supported by the fact that endothelial cells and hematopoietic cells share many of the same markers, including Flk1, Vegf, CD34, Scl, Gata2, Runx1, and Pecam-1. Furthermore, it was shown that depletion of Flk1 in the developing embryo results in disappearance of both hematopoietic cells and endothelial cells.\n\nIn 1997, Kennedy from the Keller Lab first isolated the in vitro equivalent of the hemangioblast. These cells were termed blast colony forming cells (BL-CFC). Using aggregates of differentiating mouse embryonic stem cells called embryoid bodies, the authors plated cells in the differentiation timeline just prior to the arise of hematopoietic cells. In the presence of the proper cytokines, a subset of these cells was able to differentiate into hematopoietic lineages. In addition, these same cells can also be differentiated into endothelial cells, as shown by Choi of the Keller Lab.\n\nIn 2004, hemangioblasts were isolated in the mouse embryo by Huber of the Keller Lab. They are derived from the posterior primitive streak region of the mesoderm in the gastrulating embryo. By using limiting dilutions, the authors demonstrated that the resulting hematopoietic and endothelial cells were indeed of clonal origin, proving that they had successfully isolated the hemangioblast in the developing embryo.\n\nThere is now emerging evidence of hemangioblasts that continue to exist in the adult as circulating stem cells in the peripheral blood that can give rise to both endothelial cells and hematopoietic cells. These cells are thought to express both CD34 and CD133 These cells are likely derived from the bone marrow, and may even be derived from hematopoietic stem cells.\n\n\n\nVogeli KM, Jin SW, Martin GR, Stainier DY. A common progenitor for haematopoietic and endothelial lineages in the zebrafish gastrula. Nature 2006;443(7109):337-339\n", "id": "4648752", "title": "Hemangioblast"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1570138", "text": "Phenotypic switching\n\nPhenotypic switching is switching between multiple cellular morphologies. David R. Soll described two such systems: the first high frequency switching system between several morphological stages and a second high frequency switching system between opaque and white cells. The latter is an epigenetic switching system\n\nPhenotypic switching in Candida albicans is often used to refer to the epigenetic white to opaque switching system. \"C. albicans\" needs this switch for sexual mating. \nNext to the two above mentioned switching systems many other switching systems are known in \"C. albicans\".\n\nA second example occurs in Melanoma, where malignantly transformed pigment cells switch back-and-forth between phenotypes of proliferation and invasion in response to changing microenvironments, driving metastatic progression.\n\n\n", "id": "1570138", "title": "Phenotypic switching"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11103166", "text": "Pro-oxidant\n\nPro-oxidants are chemicals that induce oxidative stress, either by generating reactive oxygen species or by inhibiting antioxidant systems. The oxidative stress produced by these chemicals can damage cells and tissues, for example an overdose of the analgesic paracetamol (acetaminophen) can fatally damage the liver, partly through its production of reactive oxygen species.\n\nSome substances can serve as either antioxidants or pro-oxidants, depending on conditions. Some of the conditions that are important include the concentration of the chemical and if oxygen or transition metals are present. While thermodynamically very favored, reduction of molecular oxygen or peroxide to superoxide or hydroxyl radical respectively is fortunately spin forbidden. This greatly reduces the rates of these reactions, thus allowing aerobic life to exist. As a result, the reduction of oxygen typically involves either the initial formation of singlet oxygen, or spin-orbit coupling through a reduction of a transition-series metal such as manganese, iron, or copper. This reduced metal then transfers the single electron to molecular oxygen or peroxide.\n\nTransition metals can serve as pro-oxidants. For example, chronic manganism is a classic \"pro-oxidant\" disease. Another disease associated with the chronic presence of a pro-oxidant transition-series metal is hemochromatosis, associated with elevated iron levels. Similarly, Wilson's disease is associated with elevated tissue levels of copper. Such syndromes tend to be associated with a common symptomology. Thus, all are occasional symptoms of (e.g) hemochromatosis, another name for which is \"bronze diabetes\". The pro-oxidant herbicide paraquat, Wilson's disease, and striatal iron have similarly been linked to human Parkinsonism. Paraquat also produces parkinsonian-like symptoms in rodents.\n\nFibrosis or scar formation is another pro-oxidant-related symptom. E.g., interocular copper or vitreous chalcosis is associated with severe vitreous fibrosis, as is interocular iron. Liver cirrhosis is also a major symptom of Wilson's disease. The pulmonary fibrosis produced by paraquat and the antitumor agent bleomycin is also thought to be induced by the pro-oxidant properties of these agents. It may be that oxidative stress produced by such agents mimics a normal physiological signal for fibroblast conversion to myofibroblasts.\n\nVitamins that are reducing agents can be pro-oxidants. Vitamin C has antioxidant activity when it reduces oxidizing substances such as hydrogen peroxide, however, it can also reduce metal ions which leads to the generation of free radicals through the fenton reaction.\n\nThe metal ion in this reaction can be reduced, oxidized, and then re-reduced, in a process called redox cycling that can generate reactive oxygen species.\n\nThe relative importance of the antioxidant and pro-oxidant activities of antioxidant vitamins are an area of current research, but vitamin C, for example, appears to have a mostly antioxidant action in the body. However, less data is available for other dietary antioxidants, such as polyphenol antioxidants, zinc, and vitamin E.\n\nSeveral important anticancer agents both bind to DNA and generate reactive oxygen species. These include adriamycin and other anthracyclines, bleomycin, and cisplatin. These agents may show specific toxicity towards cancer cells because of the low level of antioxidant defenses found in tumors. Recent research demonstrates that redox dysregulation originating from metabolic alterations and dependence on mitogenic and survival signaling through reactive oxygen species represents a specific vulnerability of malignant cells that can be selectively targeted by pro-oxidant non-genotoxic redox chemotherapeutics.\n\n", "id": "11103166", "title": "Pro-oxidant"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=512768", "text": "Differential centrifugation\n\nDifferential centrifugation is a common procedure in microbiology and cytology used to separate certain organelles from whole cells for further analysis of specific parts of cells. In the process, a tissue sample is first lysed to break the cell membranes and mix up the cell contents. The lysate is then subjected to repeated centrifugations, where density separation causes a sediment to form known as \"pellet\". After each centrifugation the pellet is removed and the centrifugal force is increased. Finally, purification may be done through equilibrium sedimentation, and the desired layer is extracted for further analysis.\n\nIn general the equilibrium sedimentation profile is a function of particle-density alone; however, in a viscous fluid the rate of sedimentation is also a function of particle size. The reason for this is that (for a given radius of rotation and rotational velocity), the centrifugal force on a particle is proportional to the particle diameter cubed (for a given particle-density), whereas the force from viscous drag (or Stoke's force) is only proportional to the particle diameter squared. This means that larger particles sediment more quickly and at lower centrifugal forces, potentially causing a sedimentation profile that may be distorted by particle sizes and not quite in equilibrium with density. For this reason, multiple centrifugation steps are used in the separation process in order to obtain sedimentation profiles that are closer to having an equilibrium with density. \n\nAs an example, unbroken whole cells will pellet at low speeds and short intervals such as 1,000g for 5 minutes. Smaller cell fragments and organelles remain in the supernatant and require more force and longer durations to pellet. In general, one can enrich for the following cell components, in the separating order in actual application:\nHigh g-force makes sedimentation of small particles much faster than Brownian diffusion, even for very small particles. When a centrifuge is used, Stokes' law must be modified to account for the variation in g-force with distance from the center of rotation. \n\nwhere\n\nBefore differential centrifugation can be carried out to separate different portions of a cell from one another, the tissue sample must first be lysed. In this process, a blender, usually a piece of porous porcelain of the same shape and dimension as the container, is used. The container is, in most cases, a glass boiling tube.\n\nThe tissue sample is first crushed and a buffer solution is added to it, forming a liquid suspension of crushed tissue sample. The buffer solution is a dense, inert, aqueous solution which is designed to suspend the sample in a liquid medium without damaging it through chemical reactions or osmosis. In most cases, the solution used is sucrose solution; in certain cases brine will be used. Then, the blender, connected to a high-speed rotor, is inserted into the container holding the sample, pressing the crushed sample against the wall of the container.\n\nWith the rotator turned on, the tissue sample is ground by the porcelain pores and the container wall into tiny fragments. This grinding process will break the cell membranes of the sample's cells, leaving individual organelles suspended in the solution. This process is called cell lysis. A portion of cells will remain intact after grinding and some organelles will be damaged, and these will be catered for in the later stages of centrifugation.\n\nThe lysed sample is now ready for centrifugation in an ultracentrifuge. An ultracentrifuge consists of a refrigerated, low-pressure chamber containing a rotor which is driven by an electrical motor capable of high speed rotation. Samples are placed in tubes within or attached to the rotor. Rotational speed may reach up to 100,000 rpm for floor model, 150,000 rpm for bench-top model (Beckman Optima Max-XP or Sorvall MTX150), creating centrifugal speed forces of 800,000g to 1,000,000g. This force causes sedimentation of macromolecules, and can even cause non-uniform distributions of small molecules.\n\nSince different fragments of a cell have different sizes and densities, each fragment will settle into a pellet with different minimum centrifugal forces. Thus, separation of the sample into different layers can be done by first centrifuging the original lysate under weak forces, removing the pellet, then exposing the subsequent supernatants to sequentially greater centrifugal fields. Each time a portion of different density is sedimented to the bottom of the container and extracted, and repeated application produces a rank of layers which includes different parts of the original sample. Additional steps can be taken to further refine each of the obtained pellets.\n\nSedimentation depends on mass, shape, and partial specific volume of a macromolecule, as well as solvent density, rotor size and rate of rotation. The sedimentation velocity can be monitored during the experiment to calculate molecular weight.\nValues of sedimentation coefficient (S) can be calculated. Large values of S (faster sedimentation rate) correspond to larger molecular weight. Dense particle sediments more rapidly. Elongated proteins have larger frictional coefficients, and sediment more slowly to ensure accuracy.\n\n\nhttp://www.chemeurope.com/en/encyclopedia/Sucrose_gradient_centrifugation.html\n", "id": "512768", "title": "Differential centrifugation"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1331404", "text": "Inhibitor protein\n\nThe inhibitor protein (IP) is situated in the mitochondrial matrix and protects the cell against rapid ATP hydrolysis during momentary ischaemia. In oxygen absence, the pH of the matrix drops. This causes IP to become protonated and change its conformation to one that can bind to the F1Fo synthetase and stops it thereby preventing it from moving in a backwards direction and hydrolyze ATP instead of make it. When oxygen is finally incorporated into the system, the pH rises and IP is deprotonated. IP dissociates from the F1Fo synthetase and allows it to resume its ATP synthesis.\n", "id": "1331404", "title": "Inhibitor protein"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1592648", "text": "Chromatoidal bodies\n\nChromatoidal bodies are aggregations of ribosomes found in cysts of some amoebae including \"Entamoeba histolytica\" and \"Entamoeba coli\". They exist in the cytoplasm and are dark staining.\n", "id": "1592648", "title": "Chromatoidal bodies"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6020806", "text": "Contact inhibition\n\nIn cell biology, contact inhibition refers to two different but closely related phenomena: contact inhibition of locomotion (CIL) and contact inhibition of proliferation (CIP). CIL refers to the avoidance behavior exhibited by fibroblast-like cells when in contact with one another. In most cases, when two cells contact each other, they attempt to alter their locomotion in a different direction to avoid future collision. When collision is unavoidable, a different phenomenon occurs whereby growth of the cells of the culture itself eventually stops in a cell-density dependent manner. Both types of contact inhibition are well-known properties of normal cells and contribute to the regulation of proper tissue growth, differentiation, and development. It is worth noting that both types of regulation are normally negated and overcome during organogenesis during embryonic development and tissue and wound healing. However, contact inhibition of locomotion and proliferation are both aberrantly absent in cancer cells, and the absence of this regulation contributes to tumorigenesis.\n\nContact inhibition is a regulatory mechanism that functions to keep cells growing into a layer one cell thick (a monolayer). If a cell has plenty of available substrate space, it replicates rapidly and moves freely. This process continues until the cells occupy the entire substratum. At this point, normal cells will stop replicating.\n\nAs motile cells come into contact in confluent cultures, they exhibit decreased mobility and mitotic activity over time. Interestingly, exponential growth has been shown to occur between colonies in contact for numerous days, with the inhibition of mitotic activity occurring far later. This delay between cell-cell contact and onset of proliferation inhibition is shortened as the culture becomes more confluent. Thus, it may be reasonably concluded that cell-cell contact is an essential condition for contact inhibition of proliferation, but is by itself insufficient for mitotic inhibition. In addition to making contact with other cells, the contact-inhibited cells must also be forced to reduce its cell area under the mechanical stress and constraints imposed by surrounding cells. Indeed, it has been suggested that mechanical tension acts as an inhibitory signal for mitosis. Moreover, it is important to note that such an inhibition of mitotic activity is a local phenomenon; it occurs between a select few cells in a likely heterogeneous culture.\n\nUntransformed human cells exhibit normal cellular behavior and mediate their growth and proliferation via interplay between environmental nutrients, growth factor signaling, and cell density. As cell density increases and the culture becomes confluent, they initiate cell cycle arrest and downregulate proliferation and mitogen signaling pathways regardless of external factors or cellular metabolism. This property is known as contact inhibition of proliferation and is essential to proper embryonic development, as well as tissue repair, differentiation, and morphogenesis. Cancerous cells typically lose this property and thus divide and grow over each other in an uncontrolled manner even when in contact with neighbouring cells. This results in the invasion of surrounding tissues, their metastasis to nearby organs, and eventually tumorigenesis. Interestingly, cells of naked mole rats, a species in which cancer has never been observed, show hypersensitivity to contact inhibition. This finding may provide a clue to cancer resistance. Furthermore, recent studies have further revealed some mechanisms of contact inhibition of proliferation and its potential implications in cancer therapy.\n\nFurthermore, it has been shown that cell-cell adhesion formation not only restricts growth and proliferation by imposing physical constraints such as cell area, but also by triggering signaling pathways that downregulate proliferation. One such pathway is the Hippo-YAP signaling pathway, which is largely responsible for inhibiting cell growth in mammals. This pathway consists primarily of a phosphorylation cascade involving serine kinases and is mediated by regulatory proteins, which regulate cell growth by binding to growth-controlling genes. The serine/threonine kinase Hippo (Mst1/Mst2 in mammals) activates a secondary kinase (Lats1/Lats2), which phosphorylates YAP, a transcriptional activator of growth genes. The phosphorylation of YAP serves to export it from the nucleus and prevent it from activating growth-promoting genes; this is how the Hippo-YAP pathway inhibits cell growth. More importantly, the Hippo-YAP pathway uses upstream elements to act in response to cell-cell contact and controls density-dependent inhibition of proliferation. For example, cadherins are transmembrane proteins that form cellular junctions via homophilic binding and thus act as detectors for cell-cell contact. Cadherin-mediated activation of the inhibitory pathway involves the transmembrane E-cadherin forming a homophilic bond in order to activate α- and β-catenin, which then stimulate downstream components of the Hippo-YAP pathway to ultimately downregulate cell growth. This is consistent with the finding that E-cadherin overexpression hinders metastasis and tumorigenesis. Because YAP is shown to be associated with mitogenic growth factor signaling and thus cell proliferation, it is likely that future studies will focus on the Hippo-YAP pathway's role in cancer cells.\n\nHowever, it is important to note that contact-inhibited cells undergo cell cycle arrest, but do not senesce. In fact, it has been shown that contact-inhibited cells resume normal proliferation and mitogen signaling upon being replated in a less confluent culture. Thus, contact inhibition of proliferation may be viewed as a reversible form of cell cycle arrest. Furthermore, to transition from cell cycle arrest to senescence, contact-inhibited cells must activate growth-activating pathways such as mTOR. Once cells in high-density cultures become confluent enough such that the cell area falls below a critical value, the adhesion formations trigger pathways that downregulate mitogen signaling and cell proliferation. The growth-promoting mTOR pathway is therefore inhibited, and consequently the contact-inhibited cells cannot transition from cell cycle arrest to senescence. This has crucial implications in cancer therapy; even though cancer cells are not contact-inhibited, confluent cancer cell cultures still suppress their senescence machinery. Therefore, this may be a plausible explanation why senescence-inducing cancer therapy drugs are ineffective.\n\nIn most cases, when two cells collide they attempt to move in a different direction to avoid future collisions; this behavior is known as contact inhibition of locomotion. As the two cells come into contact, their locomotive process is paralyzed. This is accomplished via a multistep, multi-faceted mechanism that involves the formation of a cell-cell adhesion complex upon collision. The disassembly of this complex is thought to be driven largely by tension in the cells and ultimately results in the colliding cells' changing directions.\n\nFirst, motile cells collide and touch via their respective lamellae, whose actin exhibit high retrograde flow. A cellular adhesion forms between the lamellae, reducing the actins' retrograde flow rate in the area immediately surrounding the adhesion. Consequently, the cells' velocity and motility are reduced. This then allows actin stress fibers and microtubules to form and align with each other in both colliding partners. The alignment of these stress fibers locally accumulates elastic tension in the lamellae. Eventually, the tension buildup becomes too great, and the cell adhesion complex dissociates, collapses the lamellae protrusions, and releases the cells in different directions in an effort to alleviate the elastic tension. A possible alternate event that also leads to the assembly dissociation is that upon stress fiber alignment, the cells' leading edges repolarize away from the contiguous lamellae. This produces significant elastic tension across the entire cell bodies, \"not only at the local site of contact\", and likewise causes the adhesion complex's disassembly. Elastic tension has been thought to be the primary driving force of the protrusion collapse, complex disassembly, and the cells' dispersion. Though this hypothetical tension has been characterized and visualized, how tension builds in lamellae and how cell repolarization contributes to tension buildup remain open to investigation. \nFurthermore, as replication increases the amount of cells, the number of directions those cells can move without touching another is decreased. Cells will also attempt to move away from another cell because they stick better to the area around them, a structure called the substratum, than on other cells. When the two cells colliding are different types of cells, one or both may respond to the collision.\n\nSome immortalised cell lines, despite being able to proliferate indefinitely, still experience contact inhibition, though generally to a lesser extent than normal cell lines.\n\n", "id": "6020806", "title": "Contact inhibition"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=505110", "text": "Lysis buffer\n\nA lysis buffer is a buffer solution used for the purpose of breaking open cells for use in molecular biology experiments that analyze the compounds of the cells (e.g. western blot). Most lysis buffers contain salts (e.g. Tris-HCl or EDTA) to regulate the acidity and osmolarity of the lysate. Sometimes detergents (such as Triton X-100 or SDS) are added to break up membrane structures. Lysis buffer can be used on both animal and plant tissue cells.\n\nThe primary purpose of lysis buffer is isolating the compounds of interest and keeping them in a stable environment. For proteins, for some experiments, the target proteins should be completely denatured, while in some other experiments the target protein should remain functional. Different proteins also have different properties and are found in different cellular environments. Thus, it is essential to choose the best buffer based on the purpose and design of the experiments. The important factors to be considered are: pH, ionic strength, usage of detergent, preventative measure for proteolytic processes. For example, detergent addition is necessary when lysing Gram-negative bacteria, but not for Gram-positive bacteria. It is common that a protease inhibitor is added to lysis buffer, along with other enzyme inhibitors of choice, such as a phosphotase inhibitor when studying proteins with phosphorylation.\n\nBuffer creates an environment for isolated proteins. Each buffer choice has a specific pH range, so the buffer should be chosen based on whether your target protein is stable under a certain pH. Also, for buffers with similar pH ranges, it is important to consider whether the buffer is compatible with your target protein. The table below contains several most commonly used buffers and their pH ranges.\n\nLysis buffer usually contains one or more salts. The function of salts in lysis buffer is to establish an ionic strength in the buffer solution. Some of the most commonly used salts are NaCl, KCl, and (NH)SO They are usually used with a concentration between 50 and 150 mM.\n\nDetergents are organic amphipathic (with hydrophobic tail and a hydrophilic head) surfactants. They are used to separate membrane proteins from membrane because the hydrophobic part of detergent can surround biological membranes and thus isolate membrane proteins from membranes. Although detergents are widely used and have similar functions, it is important to understand the physical and chemical properties of the detergents of interest in order to determine the optimal one to use for your experiment.\n\nDetergents are often categorized as nonionic, anionic, cationic, or zwitterionic, based on their hydrophilic head group feature.\n\nNonionic detergents like Triton X-100 and zwitterionic detergents like CHAPS (3-[(3-cholamidopropyl)dimethylammonio]-1-propanesulfonate) are nondenaturing (will not disrupt protein functions). Ionic detergents like sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and cationic detergents like ethyl trimethyl ammonium bromide are denaturing (will disrupt protein functions). Detergents are the primary ingredient that determines the strength of a buffer.\n\nOther additives include metal ions, sugar like glucose, glycerol, reducing agents like dithiothreitol (DTT).\n\nIt may be the most widely used lysis buffer. The solubilizing agent is NP-40, which can be replaced by other detergents at different concentrations. Since NP-40 is a nonionic detergent, this lysis buffer has a milder effect than RIPA buffer. It can be used when protein functions are to be retained with minimal disruption.\n\nRecipe:\n\nRIPA buffer is a commonly used lysis buffer for immunoprecipitation and general protein extraction from cells and tissues. The buffer can be stored without vanadate at 4 °C for up to 1 year. RIPA buffer releases proteins from cells as well as disrupts most weak interactions between proteins.\n\nRecipe:\n\nSDS is ionic denaturing detergent. Hot SDS buffer is often used when the proteins need to be completely solubilized and denatured.\n\nRecipe:\n\nACK is used for lysis of red blood cells in biological samples where other cells such as white blood cells are of greater interest.\n\nRecipe:\n\nIn studies like DNA fingerprinting the lysis buffer is used for DNA isolation. Dish soap can be used in a pinch to break down the cell and nuclear membranes, allowing the DNA to be released. Other such lysis buffers include the proprietary Qiagen product Buffer P2.\n", "id": "505110", "title": "Lysis buffer"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1494133", "text": "Intracellular pH\n\nIntracellular pH is around 6.8 due to acid production. It contains low HCO levels and thereby at pCO above 45 mmHg, the pH can not be 7.4 but much lower. \nThe intercellular pH of HEK cells (HEK 293) is 7.3.\n\nIn the pH range between 6.8 and 7.4, lymphocytes maintain a constant internal pH of 7.17± 0.06 pH unit. Outside this range, intracellular pH changes with extracelular pH.\n\nPioneer researchers in the area of intracellular pH include Jacques Pouyssegur (University of Nice, France), Albrecht Schwab, University of Münster, Germany, and Diane Barber, University of California, San Francisco, USA.\n", "id": "1494133", "title": "Intracellular pH"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9054449", "text": "Tether (cell biology)\n\nBiological cells which form bonds with a substrate and are at the same time subject to a flow can form long thin membrane cylinders called tethers, which connect the adherent area to the main body of the cell. Under physiological conditions, neutrophil tethers can extend to several micrometers.\n\nIn biochemistry, a tether is a molecule that carries 1 or 2 carbon intermediates from one active site to another. They are commonly used in lipid synthesis, gluconeogenesis, conversion of pyruvate into Acetyl CoA via PDH complex. Common tethers are lipoate -lysine residue complex associated with dihydrolipoyl transacetylase, which is used for carrying hydroxyethyl from hydroxyethyl TPP. This compound forms Acetyl- CoA, a convergent molecule in metabolic pathways. \n\nAnother tether is biotin- lysine residue complex associated with pyruvate carboxylase, an enzyme which plays an important role in gluconeogenesis. It is involved in the production of oxaloacetate from pyruvate. \n\nOne of the biological tethers used in the synthesis of fats is a β- mercaptoethylamine-pantothenate complex associated with an acyl carrier protein.\n", "id": "9054449", "title": "Tether (cell biology)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=512512", "text": "Extracellular field potential\n\nThe extracellular field potential is the electrical potential produced by cells, e.g. nerve or muscle cells, outside of the cell. Electrophysiological studies investigate these potentials using extracellular microelectrodes. In these experiments the extracellular field potential will be detected as an electrical potential whose source and composition is often ambiguous, making its interpretation difficult. Individual nerve cells neurons may produce spikes seen as peaks of some tens to hundreds of microvolts. Contributions from neighboring neurons may overlap, producing extracellular potentials of up to several millivolts. Spatially integrating over even larger populations of cells, i.e. lumps of nervous or muscular tissue, will produce signals commonly called local field potentials (LFP) that can be recorded either in the tissue or with suitable equipment at the body surface as, e.g., electroencephalogram (EEG), electrocardiogram (ECG), or electromyogram (EMG).\n\nFor individual cells, the time course of the extracellular potential theoretically is inversely proportional to the transmembrane current. In practice, however, this is complicated considerably by the very complex morphology of neurons and the overlap of contributions from adjacent cells.\n\n", "id": "512512", "title": "Extracellular field potential"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6969587", "text": "Small intensely fluorescent cell\n\nSmall intensely fluorescent cells (SIF cells) are the interneurons of the sympathetic ganglia (postganglionic neurons) of the Sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system (ANS). The neurotransmitter for these cells is dopamine. They are a neural crest derivative and share a common sympathoadrenal precursor cell with sympathetic neurons and chromaffin cells (adrenal medulla).\n", "id": "6969587", "title": "Small intensely fluorescent cell"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25513182", "text": "Mobile Membranes\n\nMembrane systems have been inspired from the structure and the functioning of the living cells. They were introduced and studied by Gh.Paun under the name of P systems [24]; some applications of the membrane systems are presented in [15]. Membrane systems are essentially models of distributed, parallel and nondeterministic systems. Here we motivate and present the mobile membranes. Mobile membranes represent a variant of membrane systems inspired by the biological movements given by endocytosis and exocytosis. They have the expressive power of both P systems and process calculi with mobility such as mobile ambients [11] and brane calculi [10]. Computations with mobile membranes can be defined over specific configurations (like process calculi), while they represent also a rule-based formalism (like P systems).\n\nThe model is characterized by two essential features:\n\nThe computations are performed in the following way: starting from an initial structure, the system evolves by applying the rules in a nondeterministic and maximally parallel manner. A rule is applicable when all the involved objects and membranes appearing in its left hand side are available. The maximally parallel way of using the rules means that in each step a maximal multiset of rules is applied, namely a multiset of rules such that no further rule can be added to the set. A halting configuration is reached when no rule is applicable. The result is represented by the number of objects associated to a specified membrane.\n\nMobile membranes represents a formalism which describes the movement of membranes inside a spatial structure by applying rules from a given set of rules formula_1. The mobility is provided by consumption and rewriting of objects. In terms of computation, the work is performed using membrane configurations. A the set formula_2 of membrane configurations (ranged by formula_3) os defined by using the free monoid formula_4 (ranged over by formula_5) generated by a finite alphabet formula_6 (ranged over by formula_7):\n\nformula_8\n\nIf formula_9 and formula_10 are two membrane configurations, formula_9 reduces to formula_10 (denoted by formula_13) if there exists a rule in the set of rules formula_1 applicable to the configuration formula_9 such that the new configuration formula_10 is obtained. When applying the rules of formula_1, also the following inference rules are used:\n\nformula_18;\n\nformula_19\n\nWhen describing a computation of a systems of mobile membranes, an initial configuration formula_20 and a set of rules formula_1 are given. The rules used in this paper describe an formula_22 (object rewriting), formula_23 movement (moving an elementary membrane inside a neighbouring membrane), formula_24 movement (moving an elementary membrane outside the membrane where it is placed), formula_25 (engulfing zero external membranes), and formula_26 (engulfing just one external elementary membrane).\n\nA specific feature of the mobile membranes is that this new rule-based model is appropriate to prove computability results in terms of Turing machines rather by reduction to the lambda calculus as in the case of process calculi with mobility. In this section are defined four classes of membranes inspired from biological facts, and it is shown that their computational power depends on the initial configuration and on the set of rules used.\n\nThe \"systems of simple mobile membranes\" (SM) are defined over the set of configurations formula_27, and evolve using \"endocytosis\" and \"exocytosis\" rules, namely moving a membrane inside a neighbouring membrane, or outside the membrane where it is placed, respectively. The evolution from a configuration to another is made using rules from the set of rules formula_1 defined as follows:\n\nformula_29, for formula_30, formula_31, formula_32; (local object evolution)\n\nformula_33, for formula_34, formula_35, formula_32; (global object evolution)\n\nformula_37, for formula_38, formula_39; (endocytosis)\n\nformula_40, for formula_38, formula_39; (exocytosis)\n\nwhere formula_43 is a multiset, and formula_9, formula_10 are arbitrary membrane configurations.\n\n[[Turing completeness]] can be obtained by using nine membranes together with the operations of endocytosis and exocytosis [[#References|[21]]]. In [[#References|[17]]] it is proven that four mobile membranes are enough to get the power of a Turing machine, while in [[#References|[4]]] the number of membranes is decreased to three.\n\nformula_46 denotes the family of all sets generated inside a given membrane by simple mobile membranes using local evolution rules (formula_47), endocytosis and exocytosis rules. Whenever global evolution rules (formula_48) are used, the parameter formula_47 is replaced by formula_48. If a type of rules is not used, then its name is omitted from the list. The number of membranes does not increase during the computation, but it can decrease by sending membranes out of the system. In this case, the formula_51 denotes the family of sets of vectors of natural numbers computed by using at most $n$ membranes. formula_52 denoted the family of Turing computable sets of vectors generated by arbitrary grammars.\n\nIt is proved in [[#References|[17]]] that formula_53. The research line initiated in membrane computing is to find membrane systems with a minimal set of ingredients which are powerful enough to achieve the full power of Turing machines. In this way previous result presented in [[#References|[17]]] are improved by decreasing the number of membranes to three.\nMoreover, this is achieved by using local evolution rules instead of global evolution rules.\n\nTheorem. formula_54.\n\nThe proof of this result uses a similar technique to that used in [[#References|[4]]].\n\nThe \"systems of enhanced mobile membranes\" are a variant of simple membrane systems proposed in [[#References|[1]]] for\ndescribing some biological mechanisms of the immune system. The operations governing the mobility of the systems of enhanced mobile\nmembranes are endocytosis (endo), exocytosis (exo), forced endocytosis (fendo), forced exocytosis (fexo).The evolution from a\nconfiguration to another is made using rules from the set of rules formula_1 defined as follows:\n\nformula_56 for formula_57; (endocytosis)\n\nformula_58, for formula_59; (exocytosis)\n\nformula_60 for formula_61,\nformula_62; (enhanced endocytosis)\n\nformula_63 for formula_64;(enhanced exocytosis)\n\n\\noindent where formula_9 is a multiset and formula_10 is an arbitrary membrane configuration.\n\nThe computational power of the systems of enhanced mobile membranes using these four operations was studied in [[#References|[20]]] where it is proved that twelve membranes can provide the computational universality, while in [[#References|[4]]] the result is improved by reducing the number of membranes to nine. It is worth to note that unlike the previous results, the rewriting of object by means of context-free rules is not used in any of the results (and their proofs).\n\nThe interplay between these four operations is quite powerful, and the computational power of a Turing machine is obtained using twelve membranes without using the context-free evolution of objects [[#References|[20]]].\n\nThe family of all sets generated inside a given membrane by enhanced mobile membranes of degree at most formula_67 using rules formula_68, is denoted by formula_69.\n\nTheorem. formula_70.\n\nTheorem. formula_71.\n\nWhen proving the result of the previous theorem the authors have not used an optimal construction of a membrane system. In what follows it is proven that using the same types of rules (\"endo\", \"exo\", \"fendo\", \"fexo\") a membrane system can be constructed using only nine membranes instead of twelve membranes. If this is an optimal construction remains an open problem.\n\nTheorem. formula_72.\n\nThe proof is similar to that presented in [[#References|[4]]].\n\nFollowing the approach presented in [[#References|[3]]], \"systems of mutual mobile membranes\" representing a variant of systems of simple mobile membranes in which the endocytosis and the exocytosis work whenever the involved membranes \"agree\" on the movement are defined; this agreement is described by using dual objects formula_73 and formula_74 in the involved membranes. The operations governing the mobility of the systems of mutual mobile membranes are mutual endocytosis (mutual endo), and mutual exocytosis (mutual exo). The evolution from a configuration to another is made using rules from the set of rules formula_1 defined as follows:\n\nformula_76 for formula_77; (mutual endocytosis)\n\nformula_78 for formula_79; (mutual exocytosis)\n\nwhere formula_9 is a multiset and formula_10 is an arbitrary membrane configuration.\n\nIt is enough to consider the biologically inspired operations of mutual endocytosis and mutual exocytosis and three membranes to get the full computational power of a Turing machine [[#References|[6]]]. Three also represents the minimum number of membranes in order to discuss properly about the movement provided by endocytosis and exocytosis: working with configurations corresponding to a system of two membranes moving inside a skin membrane.\n\nThe family of all sets generated inside a given membrane by mutual mobile membranes of degree formula_67 using mutual endocytosis rules (\"mendo\") and mutual exocytosis rules (\"mexo\") is denoted by formula_83. Therefore, the result can be formulated as following.\n\nTheorem. formula_84.\n\nIn systems of simple mobile membranes with local evolution rules and mobility rules it is known that systems of degree three have the same power as a Turing machine, while in systems of enhanced mobile membranes using only mobility rules the degree of systems having the same power as a Turing machine increases to nine. In each mobility rule from systems of simple and enhanced mobile membranes, in the left hand side of the rules only one object appears in the proofs. By using multisets instead of objects and synchronization by objects and co-objects, it is proved that it is enough to consider only systems of three mutual mobile membranes together with the operations of mutual endocytosis and mutual exocytosis to get the full computational power of a Turing machine.\n\nThe proof is done in a similar manner with the proof for the computational universality of the systems of enhanced mobile\nmembranes [[#References|[20]]].\n\nMembrane systems [[#References|[24]]] and brane calculus [[#References|[10]]] start from the same observations; however, they are build having in mind different goals: membrane systems investigate formally the computational nature and power of various features of membranes, while the brane calculus is capable to give a faithful and intuitive representation of the biological reality. In [[#References|[12]]] the initiators of these two formalisms describe the goals they had in mind: \"While membrane computing is a branch of natural computing which tries to abstract computing models, in the Turing sense, from the structure and the functioning of the cell, making use especially of automata, language, and complexity theoretic tools, brane calculi pay more attention to the fidelity to the biological reality, have as a primary target systems biology, and use especially the framework of process~algebra.\"\n\nIn [[#References|[2]]] are defined systems of mutual membranes with objects on surface, following the idea of adding objects on membrane and using the biologically inspired rules pino/exo/phago coming from [[#References|[12,14,18,19]]]. Objects and co-objects are used in phago and exo rules in order to illustrate the fact that both involved membranes agree on the movement.\nThe evolution from a configuration to another is made using rules from the set of rules formula_1 defined as follows:\n\nformula_86, for formula_87 (pino)\n\nformula_88, for aformula_89 (exo)\n\nformula_90, for formula_91 (phago)\n\n\\noindent where formula_43 is a multiset and formula_9, formula_10 are arbitrary membrane configurations.\n\nThe computational power of systems of mutual membranes with objects on surface controlled by pairs of rules is investigated:\npino/exo or phago/exo, proving that they are universal even using a small number of membranes. These cases were already investigated in [[#References|[19]]]; however better results are provided by improving the number of membranes. A summary of the results (existing and new ones) is given in what follows:\n\nThe multiplicity vector of the multiset from all membranes is considered as a result of the computation. Thus, the result of a halting computation consists of all the vectors describing the multiplicity of objects from all the membranes; a non-halting computation provides no output. The number of objects from the right-hand side of a rule is called its \"weight\". The family of all sets generated by systems of mutual membranes with objects on surface using at any moment during a halting computation\nat most formula_67 membranes, and any of the rules formula_96 of weight at most formula_97 respectively, is denoted by formula_98). When one of the parameters is not bounded, it is replaced it with a formula_99.\n\nIt is proven in [[#References|[19]]] that systems of eight membranes with objects on surface and using pino and exo operations\nof weight four and three are universal. The number of membranes can be reduced from eight to three. Howevere, in order to do\nthis is increased the weight of the pino and exo operations with one, namely from four and three to five and four. This means\nthat in order to construct a universal system of mobile membranes with objects on surface by using pino and exo operations, one needs to decide either he wants to minimize the number of membranes, or the weights of the operations.\n\nTheorem. formula_100, for all formula_101.\n\nIt is proven in [[#References|[19]]] that systems of nine membranes with objects on surface and using phago and exo operations of weight four and three (or five and two) are universal. The number of membranes can be reduced from nine to four, but in order to do this the weight of the phago and exo operations are increased from four and three (or five and two) to six and three. When constructing a Turing complete system of mobile membranes with objects on surface by using phago and exo operations, the same problem appears as when using pino and exo operations: namely, to choose either minimizing the number of membranes, or the weights of the operations.\n\nTheorem. formula_102, for all formula_103.\n\nIn what follows it is shown that mobile membranes have at least the expressive power of [[mobile ambients]] and brane calculi by encoding [[mobile ambients]] and brane calculi in certain systems of mobile membranes.\n\nThe mobile membranes and the [[mobile ambients]] [[#References|[11]]] have similar structures and common concepts. Both have a hierarchical structure representing locations, intend to describe mobility, and are used in describing various biological phenomena [[#References|[10,15]]]. The [[mobile ambients]] are suitable to represent the movement of ambients through ambients and the communication which takes place inside the boundaries of ambients. Membrane systems are suitable to represent the evolution of objects and movement of objects and membranes through membranes. A comparing between these new models ([[mobile ambients]] and mobile membranes) is provided, and an encoding the ambients into membranes. This embedding is essentially presented in [[#References|[5]]].\n\nSafe ambients represent a variant of [[mobile ambients]] in which any movement of an ambient takes place only if both participants agree. The mobility is provided by the consumption of certain pairs of capabilities. The safe ambients differ from [[mobile ambients]] by the addition of co-actions: if in mobile ambients a movement is initiated only by the moving ambient and the target ambient has no control over it, in safe ambients both participants must agree by using a matching between action and co-action. A short description of pure safe ambients (SA) is given below; more information can be found in [[#References|[22,23]]]. Given an infinite set of names formula_104 (ranged over by formula_105), the set formula_106 of SA-processes (denoted by formula_107) together with their capabilities (denoted by formula_108) are defined as follows:\n\nformula_109\n\nformula_110\n\nProcess formula_111 is an inactive mobile ambient. A movement formula_112 is provided by the capability formula_113, followed by the execution of formula_114. An ambient formula_115 represents a bounded place labelled by formula_67 in which a SA-process formula_114 is executed. formula_118 is a parallel composition of [[mobile ambients]] formula_114 and formula_120. formula_121 creates a new unique name formula_67 within the scope of formula_114. The \"structural congruence\" formula_124 over ambients is the least congruence such that formula_125 is a commutative monoid.\n\nThe operational semantics of pure ambient safe calculus are defined in terms of a reduction relation formula_126 by the following axioms and rules.\n\nAxioms:\n\nformula_127;\n\nformula_128;\n\nformula_129.\n\nRules:\n\nformula_130;\n\nformula_131.\n\nformula_132 denotes a reflexive and transitive closure of the binary relation formula_126.\n\nA translation from the set formula_134 of safe ambients to the set formula_27 of membrane configurations is given formally as follows:\n\nDefinition. A translation formula_136 is given by\nformula_137, where formula_138 is\n\nformula_139formula_140\n\nAn object formula_141 is placed near the membrane structure to prevent the consumption of capability objects in a membrane system which\ncorresponds to a mobile ambient which cannot evolve further.\n\nProposition. Structurally congruent ambients are translated into structurally congruent membrane systems; moreover, structurally congruent translated membrane systems correspond to structurally congruent ambients:\nformula_142 iff formula_143.\n\nConsidering two membrane systems formula_9 and formula_10 with only one object formula_141, formula_147 if there is a sequence of rules formula_148, from the particular set of rules used in\n[[#References|[7]]], such that applying the rules from this set to the membrane configuration formula_9 it is obtained the membrane configuration formula_10.\n\nProposition. If formula_114 and formula_120 are two ambients and formula_9 is a membrane system such that formula_154 and formula_155, then there exists a set of rules applicable to formula_9 such that formula_147, and formula_158.\n\nProposition. Let formula_9 and formula_10 be two membrane systems with only one formula_141 object, and an ambient formula_114 such that formula_155. If there is a set of rules applicable to formula_9 such that formula_165, then there exists an ambient formula_120 with formula_167 and formula_158. The number of pairs of non-star objects consumed in membrane systems is equal with the number of pairs of capabilities consumed in ambients.\n\nTheorem. \"(Operational correspondence)\" \n\nA fragment of brane calculus called PEP, and mutual mobile membranes with objects on surface as a variant of systems with mobile membranes are considered. The mobile membranes with objects on surface is inspired by a model of membrane system introduced in [[#References|[12]]] having objects attached to membranes. A simulation of the PEP fragment of brane calculus by using mutual\nmembranes with objects on surface is presented. This approach is related to some other papers trying to show the relationship between membrane systems and brane calculus [[#References|[8,9,14,18,19]]].\n\nAs it is expressed in [[#References|[24]]], \"at the first sight the role of objects placed on membranes is different in membrane and brane systems: in membrane computing the focus is on the evolution of objects themselves, while in brane calculi the objects (\"proteins\") mainly control the evolution of membranes\". By defining an encoding of the PEP fragment of brane calculus into mutual membranes with objects on surface, it is shown that the difference between the two models is not significant. Another difference regarding the semantics of the two formalisms is expressed in [[#References|[8]]]: \"whereas brane calculi are usually equipped with an interleaving, sequential semantics (each computational step consists of the execution of a single instruction), the usual semantics in membrane computing is based on maximal parallelism (a computational step is composed of a maximal set of independent interactions)\".\n\nBrane calculus [[#References|[10]]] deals with membranes representing the sites of activity; thus a computation happens on the membrane surface. The operations of the two basic brane calculi, \"pino, exo, phago\" (PEP) and \"mate, drip, bud\" (MBD) are directly inspired by biologic processes such as endocytosis, exocytosis and mitosis. The latter operations can be simulated using the formers one [[#References|[10]]].\n\nMembranes are formed of patches, where a patch formula_175 can be composed from other patches formula_176. An elementary patch formula_175 consists of an action formula_73 followed, after the consumption of it, by another patch formula_179. Actions often come in complementary pairs which cause the interaction between membranes. The names formula_67 are used to pair-up actions and co-actions. Cardelli motivates that the replication operator is used to model the notion of a \"multitude\" of components of the same kind, which is in fact a standard situation in biology [[#References|[10]]]. The replicator operator is not used because a membrane system cannot be defined without knowing exactly the initial membrane structure. formula_181 denotes the set of brane systems defined above. Some abbreviations can be made: formula_182 as formula_73, formula_184 as formula_185, and formula_186 as formula_187.\n\nThe structural congruence relation is a way of rearranging the system such that the interacting parts come together, as illustrated\nin what follows:\n\nIn what follows the reduction rules of the calculus are presented:\n\nThe action formula_188 creates an empty bubble within the membrane where the formula_189 action resides; imagine that the original membrane buckles towards inside and pinches off. The patch formula_190 on the empty bubble is a parameter of formula_189. The exo action formula_192, which comes with a complementary co-action\nformula_193, models the merging of two nested membranes, which starts with the membranes touching at a point. In the process (which is a smooth, continuous process), the subsystem formula_194 gets expelled to the outside, and all the residual patches of the two membranes become contiguous. The phago action formula_195, which also comes with a complementary co-action formula_196, models a membrane (the one with formula_197) \"eating\" another membrane (the one with formula_194). Again, the process has to be smooth and continuous, so it is biologically\nimplementable. It proceeds by the formula_197 membrane wrapping around the formula_194 membrane and joining itself on the other side. Hence, an additional layer of membrane is created around the eaten membrane: the patch on that membrane is specified by the parameter formula_201 of the co-phago action (similar to the parameter of the pino action).\n\nA translation from the set formula_181 of brane processes to the set formula_27 of membrane configurations is given formally as follows:\n\nDefinition A translation formula_204 is given by\n\nformula_205 \nformula_206\n\nwhere formula_207 is defined as:\n\nformula_208 \nformula_209\n\nThe rules of the systems of mutual membranes with objects on surface (MMOS) are presented in what follows.\n\nwhere formula_43 is a multiset and formula_9, formula_10 are arbitrary membrane configurations.\n\nThe next result claims that two PEP systems which are structurally equivalent are translated into systems of mutual membranes with objects on surface which are structurally equivalent.\n\nProposition. If formula_194 is a PEP system and formula_214 is a system of mutual membranes with objects on surface, then there exists formula_10 such that formula_216 and formula_217, whenever formula_218.\n\nProposition. If formula_194 is a PEP system and formula_214 is a system of mutual membranes with objects on surface, then there exists formula_197 such that formula_217 whenever formula_216.\n\nRemark. In the last proposition it is possible that formula_224. Suppose formula_225. By translation it is obtained that formula_226. It is possible to have formula_227 or formula_228 such that formula_217, but formula_230.\n\nProposition. If formula_194 is a PEP system and formula_214 is a system of mutual membranes with objects on surface, then there exists formula_10 such that formula_13 and formula_217, whenever formula_236.\n\nProposition. If formula_194 is a PEP system and formula_214 is a system of mutual membranes with objects on surface, then there exists formula_197 such that formula_217 whenever formula_13.\n\nThe following remark is a consequence of the fact that a formalism using an interleaving semantic is translated into a formalism working in parallel.\n\nRemark. The last proposition allows formula_242. Let us assume formula_243. By translation, it is obtained that formula_244, such that formula_245. It can be observed that there exist formula_246 such that formula_217, but formula_248.\n\nThese results are presented together with their proofs in [[#References|[2]]].\n\n1. B. Aman, G.Ciobanu. Describing the Immune System Using Enhanced Mobile Membranes. \"Electr. Notes in Theoretical Computer Science\", vol.194(3), 5—18, 2008.\n\n2. B. Aman, G.Ciobanu. Membrane Systems with Surface Objects. \"Proc. of the International Workshop on Computing with Biomolecules (CBM 2008)\", 17—29, 2008.\n\n3. B. Aman, G.Ciobanu. Resource Competition and Synchronization in Membranes. \"Proceedings of SYNASC08\", IEEE\nComputing Society, 145-151, 2009.\n\n4. B. Aman, G.Ciobanu. Simple, Enhanced and Mutual Mobile Membranes. \"Transactions on Computational Systems Biology XI', LNBI vol.5750, 26-44, 2009.\n\n5. B. Aman, G.Ciobanu. Translating Mobile Ambients into P Systems. \"Electr. Notes in Theoretical Computer Science\",\nvol.171(2), 11—23, 2007.\n\n6. B. Aman, G.Ciobanu. Turing Completeness Using Three Mobile Membranes. \"Lecture Notes in Computer Science\", vol.5715, 42—55, 2009.\n\n7. B. Aman, G. Ciobanu. On the Relationship Between Membranes and Ambients. \"Biosystems\", vol.91(3), 515—530, 2008.\n\n8. N. Busi. On the Computational Power of the Mate/Bud/Drip Brane Calculus: Interleaving vs. Maximal Parallelism. \"Lecture Notes in Computer Science\", vol.3850, Springer, 144-158, 2006.\n\n9. N. Busi, R. Gorrieri. On the computational power of Brane calculi. \"Third Workshop on Computational Methods in Systems Biology\", 106-117, 2005.\n\n10. L. Cardelli. Brane Calculi. Interactions of biological membranes. \"Lecture Notes in BioInformatics\", vol.3082, 257-278,\nSpringer, 2004.\n\n11. L. Cardelli, A. Gordon. Mobile Ambients. \"Lecture Notes in Computer Science\", vol.1378, Springer, 140-155, 1998.\n\n12. L. Cardelli, Gh. Păun. A universality result for a (mem)brane calculus based on mate/drip operations. \"Intern. J. Foundations of Computer Science\", vol.17(1), 49-68, 2006.\n\n13. L. Cardelli, S. Pradalier. Where Membranes Meet Complexes. \"BioConcur\", 2005.\n\n14. M. Cavaliere, S. Sedwards. Membrane Systems with Peripheral Proteins: Transport and Evolution. \"Electr. Notes in Theoretical Computer Science\", vol.171(2), 37-53, 2007.\n\n15. G. Ciobanu, Gh. Păun, M.J. Pérez-Jiménez. \"Application of Membrane Computing\". Springer, 2006.\n\n16. J. Dassow, Gh. Păun. \"Regulated Rewriting in Formal Language Theory\". Springer-Verlag, 1990.\n\n17. S.N. Krishna. The Power of Mobility: Four Membranes Suffice. \"Lecture Notes in Computer Science\", vol.3526, 242—251, Springer, 2005.\n\n18. S.N. Krishna. Membrane computing with transport and embedded proteins. \"Theoretical Computer Science\", vol.410, 355-375, 2009.\n\n19. S.N. Krishna. Universality results for P systems based on brane calculi operations. \"Theoretical Computer Science\", vol.371, 83-105, 2007.\n\n20. S.N. Krishna, G. Ciobanu. On the Computational Power of Enhanced Mobile Membranes. \"Lecture Notes in Computer Science\", vol.5028, 326—335, 2008.\n\n21. S.N. Krishna, Gh. Păun. P Systems with Mobile Membranes. \"Natural Computing\", vol.4(3), 255—274, 2005.\n\n22. F. Levi, D. Sangiorgi. Controlling Interference in Ambients. \"Proceedings POPL'00\", ACM Press, 352-364, 2000.\n\n23. F. Levi, D. Sangiorgi. Mobile Safe Ambients. \"ACM TOPLAS\", vol.25, 1-69, 2003.\n\n24. Gh. Păun. \"Membrane Computing. An Introduction.\" Springer-Verlang, Berlin, 2002.\n\n25. Gh. Păun. Membrane Computing and Brane Calculi(Some Personal Notes). \"Electr. Notes in Theoretical Computer Science\", vol.171, 3-10, 2007.\n\n[[Category:Cell biology]]", "id": "25513182", "title": "Mobile Membranes"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26616241", "text": "Nanoknife\n\nA nanoknife is a carbon nanotube-based prototype compression cutting tool intended for sectioning of biological cells. Working principle is similar to that of a 'cheese slicer', a nanometer-thin individual carbon nanotube strung between two tungsten needles would allow sectioning of very thin slices of biological matter for imaging under an electron microscope. Tests are currently being performed by scientists at Virginia Tech, CU-Boulder and other universities. A successful development of this new tool will allow scientists and biologists to make 3D images of cells and tissues for electron tomography, which typically requires samples less than ~300 nanometers in thickness. In 2009, the nano-knife was used to create indentation marks on biological cell plasticizer (epoxy resin). The whole cutting process is currently limited by electron charging of polymeric specimen in the SEM, which makes it difficult to observe any small cut or mark as the carbon nanotube is pressed against the specimen.\n", "id": "26616241", "title": "Nanoknife"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3641749", "text": "Cytoarchitecture\n\nCytoarchitecture (Greek \"κύτος\"= \"cell\" + \"αρχιτεκτονική\"= \"architecture\"), also known as cytoarchitectonics, is the study of the cellular composition of the body's tissues under the microscope. Applied particularly to the study of the central nervous system, cytoarchitectonics is one of the ways to parse the brain, by obtaining sections of the brain and staining them with chemical agents that reveal how neurons are \"stacked\" into layers.\n\nThe study of the parcellation of \"nerve fibers\" (primarily axons) into layers forms the subject of myeloarchitectonics (<Gk. \"μυελός\"=marrow + \"αρχιτεκτονική\"=architecture), an approach complementary to cytoarchitectonics.\n\nDefining cerebral cytoarchitecture began with the advent of histology—the science of slicing and staining brain slices for examination. It is credited to the Viennese psychiatrist Theodor Meynert (1833–1892), who in 1867 noticed regional variations in the histological structure of different parts of the gray matter in the cerebral hemispheres.\n\nPaul Flechsig was the first to present the cytoarchitecture of human brain into 40 areas.\n\nAlfred Walter Campbell, then, present the cytoarchitecture of the human brain into 14 areas.\n\nSir Grafton Elliot Smith (1871–1937), a New South Wales native working in Cairo, identified 50 areas. Korbinian Brodmann worked on the brains of diverse mammalian species and developed a division of the cerebral cortex into 52 discrete areas (of which 44 in the human, and the remaining 8 in non-human primate brain). Brodmann used numbers to categorize the different architectural areas and he believed that each of these regions served a unique functional purpose.\n\nConstantin von Economo and Georg N. Koskinas, two neurologists in Vienna, produced a landmark work in brain research by defining 107 cortical areas on the basis of cytoarchitectonic criteria. They used letters to categorize the architecture, e.g., \"F\" for areas of the frontal lobe.\n\nThe Nissl staining technique (named for Franz Nissl the neuroscientist and histologist who originated the technique) is commonly used for determining the cytoarchitectonics of neuroanatomical structures, using common agents such as thionin, cresyl violet, or neutral red. These dyes intensely stain \"Nissl bodies\" (rough endoplasmic reticulum), which are abundant in neurons and reveal specific patterns of cytoarchitecture in the brain. Other common staining techniques used by histologists in other tissues (such as the hematoxylin and eosin or \"H&E stain\") leave brain tissue appearing largely homogeneous and do not reveal the level of organization apparent in a Nissl stain. Nissl staining reveals details ranging from the macroscopic, such as the laminar pattern of the cerebral cortex or the interlocking nuclear patterns of the diencephalon and brainstem, to the microscopic, such as the distinctions between individual neurons and glia in any subregion of the central nervous system. Many other neuroanatomic and cytoarchitectonic techniques are available to supplement Nissl cytoarchitectonics, including immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization, which allow one to label any gene or protein expressed in any group of cells in the brain. However, Nissl cytoarchitecture remains a reliable, inexpensive, and familiar starting or reference point for neuroscientists wishing to examine or communicate their findings in a widely recognized anatomical framework and/or in reference to neuroanatomical atlases which use the same technique.\n\n", "id": "3641749", "title": "Cytoarchitecture"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25514357", "text": "Adoptive cell transfer\n\nAdoptive cell transfer (ACT) is the transfer of cells into a patient. The cells may have originated from the patient or from another individual. The cells are most commonly derived from the immune system with the goal of improving immune functionality and characteristics. In autologous cancer immunotherapy, T cells are extracted from the patient, genetically modified and cultured \"in vitro\" and returned to the same patient. Comparatively, allogeneic therapies involve cells isolated and expanded from a donor separate from the patient receiving the cells.\n\nIn the 1960s, lymphocytes were discovered to be the mediators of allograft rejection in animals. Attempts to use T cells to treat transplanted murine tumors required cultivating and manipulating T cells in culture. Syngeneic lymphocytes were transferred from rodents heavily immunized against the tumor to inhibit growth of small established tumors, becoming the first example of ACT.\n\nDescription of T cell growth factor interleukin-2 (IL-2) in 1976 allowed T lymphocytes to be grown \"in vitro\", often without loss of effector functions. High doses of IL-2 could inhibit tumor growth in mice. 1982, studies demonstrated that intravenous immune lymphocytes could treat bulky subcutaneous FBL3 lymphomas. Administration of IL-2 after cell transfer enhanced therapeutic potential.\n\nIn 1985 IL-2 administration produced durable tumor regressions in some patients with metastatic melanoma. Lymphocytes infiltrating the stroma of growing, transplantable tumors provided a concentrated source of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL) and could stimulate regression of established lung and liver tumors. In 1986, human TILs from resected melanomas were found to contain cells that could recognize autologous tumors. In 1988 autologous TILs were shown to reduce metastatic melanoma tumors. Tumor-derived TILs are generally mixtures of CD8 and CD4 T cells with few major contaminating cells.\n\nIn 1989 Zelig Eshhar published the first study in which a T cell’s targeting receptor was replaced, and noted that this could be used to direct T cells to attack any kind of cell; this is the essential biotechnology underlying CAR-T therapy.\n\nResponses were often of short duration and faded days after administration. In 2002, lymphodepletion using a nonmyeloablative chemotherapy regimen administered immediately before TIL transfer increased cancer regression, as well as the persistent oligoclonal repopulation of the host with the transferred lymphocytes. In some patients, the administered antitumor cells represented up to 80% of the CD8 T cells months after the infusion.\n\nInitially, melanoma was the only cancer that reproducibly yielded useful TIL cultures. In 2006 administration of normal circulating lymphocytes transduced with a retrovirus encoding a T-cell receptor (TCR) that recognized the MART-1 melanoma-melanocyte antigen, mediated tumor regression. In 2010 administration of lymphocytes genetically engineered to express a chimeric antibody receptor (CAR) against B cell antigen CD19 was shown to mediate regression of an advanced B cell lymphoma.\n\nIn 2009, a woman given T cells engineered to recognize colon cancer went into respiratory distress and died.\n\nBy 2010, doctors had begun experimental treatments for leukemia patients using CD19-targeted T cells with added DNA to stimulate cell division. As of 2015 trials had treated about 350 leukemia and lymphoma patients. Antigen CD19 appears only on B cells, which go awry in lymphoma and leukemia. Loss of B cells can be countered with immunoglobulin.\n\nStartups including Juno Therapeutics exploit the combination of aggressive tumors and FDA willingness to approve potential therapies for such ailments to accelerate approvals for new therapies.\n\nIn checkpoint therapy, antibodies bind to molecules involved in T-cell regulation to remove inhibitory pathways that block T-cell responses, known as immune checkpoint therapy.\n\nAs of 2015 the technique had expanded to treat cervical cancer, lymphoma, leukemia, bile duct cancer and neuroblastoma and in 2016, lung cancer, breast cancer, sarcoma and melanoma. In 2016, CD19-specific chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)-modified T cells were used to treat patients with relapsed and refractory CD19+ B cell malignancies, including B cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL) harboring rearrangement of the mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) gene with CD19 CAR-T cells.\n\nIn 2016, researchers developed a technique that used cancer cells' RNA to produce T cells and an immune response. They encased the RNA in a negatively charged fatty membrane. \"In vivo\", this electrical charge guided the particles towards the patient's dendritic immune cells that specify immune system targets.\n\nIn 2017, researchers announced the first use of donor cells (rather than the patients' own cells) to defeat leukemia in two infants for whom other treatments had failed. The cells had four genetic modifications. Two were made using TALENs. One changed the cells so that they did not attack all the cells of another person. Another modification made tumor cells their target.\n\nIn melanoma, a resected melanoma specimen is digested into a single-cell suspension or divided into multiple tumor fragments. The result is individually grown in IL-2. Lymphocytes overgrow. They destroy the tumors in the sample within 2 to 3 weeks. They then produce pure cultures of lymphocytes that can be tested for reactivity against other tumors, in coculture assays. Individual cultures are then expanded in the presence of IL-2 and excess irradiated anti-CD3 antibodies. The latter targets the epsilon subunit within the human CD3 complex of the TCR. 5–6 weeks after resecting the tumor, up to 10 lymphocytes can be obtained.\n\nPrior to infusion, a lymphodepleting preparative regimen is undergone, typically 60 mg/kg cyclophosphamide for 2 days and 25 mg/m fludarabine administered for 5 days. This substantially increases infused cell persistence and the incidence and duration of clinical responses. Then cells and IL-2 at 720,000 IU/kg to tolerance are infused.\n\nInterleukin-21 may play an important role in enhancing the efficacy of T cell based \"in vitro\" therapies.\n\nIn early trials, preparing engineered T cells cost $75,000 to manufacture cells for each patient.\n\nInterleukin-2 is normally added to the extracted T cells to boost their effectiveness, but in high doses it can have a toxic effect. The reduced number of injected T cells is accompanied by reduced Il-2, thereby reducing side effects. \"In vitro\" tests on melanoma and kidney cancer models met expectations.\n\nIn 2016 \"Strep\"-tag II sequences were introduced into synthetic CAR or natural T-cell receptors to serve as a marker for identification, rapid purification, tailoring spacer length for optimal function and selective, antibody-coated, microbead-driven, large-scale expansion. This facilitates cGMP manufacturing of pure populations of engineered T cells and enables \"in vivo\" tracking and retrieval of transferred cells for downstream research applications.\n\nAntitumor receptors genetically engineered into normal T cells can be used for therapy. T cells can be redirected by the integration of genes encoding either conventional alpha-beta TCRs or CARs. CARs (Chimeric Antibody Receptors) were pioneered in the late 1980s and can be constructed by linking the variable regions of the antibody heavy and light chains to intracellular signaling chains such as CD3-zeta, potentially including costimulatory domains encoding CD28 or CD137. CARs can provide recognition of cell surface components not restricted to major histocompatibility complexes (MHC). They can be introduced into T cells with high efficiency using viral vectors.\n\nImproved antitumor responses have been seen in mouse and monkey models using T cells in early differentiation stages (such as naïve or central memory cells). CD8 T cells follow a progressive pathway of differentiation from naïve T cells into stem cell memory, central memory, effector memory, and ultimately terminally differentiated effector T cell populations. CD8 T cells paradoxically lose antitumor power as they acquire the ability to lyse target cells and to produce the cytokine interferon-γ, qualities otherwise thought to be important for antitumor efficacy. Differentiation state is inversely related to proliferation and persistence. Age is negatively correlated with clinical effectiveness. CD8 T cells can exist in a stem cell–like state, capable of clonal proliferation. Human T memory stem cells express a gene program that enables them to proliferate extensively and differentiate into other T cell populations.\n\nCD4 T cells can also promote tumor rejection. CD4 T cells enhance CD8 T cell function and can directly destroy tumor cells. Evidence suggests that T helper 17 cells can promote sustained antitumor immunity.\n\nOther modes of enhancing immuno-therapy include targeting so-called intrinsic immune checkpoint blockades. Many of these intrinsic regulators include molecules with ubiquitin ligase activity, including CBLB. More recently, CISH, another molecule with ubiquitin ligase activity, was found to be induced by T cell receptor ligation (TCR) and negatively regulate it by targeting the critical signaling intermediate PLC-gamma-1 for degradation. The deletion of CISH in effector T cells has been shown to dramatically augment TCR signaling and subsequent effector cytokine release, proliferation and survival. The adoptive transfer of tumor-specific effector T cells knocked out or knocked down for CISH resulted in a significant increase in functional avidity and long-term tumor immunity. Surprisingly there was no changes in activity of Cish's purported target, STAT5. Thus Cish represents a new class of T-cell intrinsic immunologic checkpoints with the potential to radically enhance adoptive immunotherapies for cancer.\n\nNeither tumor bulk nor metastasis site affect the likelihood of achieving a complete cancer regression. Of 34 complete responders in two trials, one recurred. Only one patient with complete regression received more than one treatment. Prior treatment with targeted therapy using Braf inhibitor vemurafenib (Zelboraf) did not affect the likelihood that melanoma patients would experience an objective response. Prior failed immunotherapies did not reduce the odds of objective response.\n\nAn emerging treatment modality for various diseases is the transfer of stem cells. Clinically, this approach has been exploited to transfer either immune-promoting or tolerogenic cells (often lymphocytes) to either enhance immunity against viruses and cancer or to promote tolerance in the setting of autoimmune disease, such as Type I diabetes or rheumatoid arthritis. Cells used in adoptive therapy may be genetically modified using recombinant DNA technology. One example of this in the case of T cell adoptive therapy is the addition of chimeric antigen receptors, or CARs, to redirect the specificity of cytotoxic and helper T cells.\n\nThe adoptive transfer of autologous tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL) or genetically re-directed peripheral blood mononuclear cells has been used experimentally to treat patients with advanced solid tumors, including melanoma and colorectal carcinoma, as well as patients with CD19-expressing hematologic malignancies, cervical cancer, lymphoma, leukemia, bile duct cancer and neuroblastoma, lung cancer, breast cancer, sarcoma, melanoma, relapsed and refractory CD19+ B cell malignancies, including B cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL) harboring rearrangement of the mixed lineage leukemia (MLL).\n\nThe transfer of regulatory T cells has been used to treat Type 1 diabetes and others.\n\nTrials began in the 1990s and accelerated beginning in 2010.\nSeveral ongoing clinical trials of adoptive cell therapies are ongoing in solid tumors, but challenges in the development of such therapies for this type of malignancy include the lack of surface antigens that are not found on essential normal tissues, difficult-to-penetrate tumor stroma, and factors in the tumor microenvironment that impede the activity of the immune system.\n\nTargeting normal, nonmutated antigenic targets that are expressed on normal tissues, but overexpressed on tumors has led to severe on-target, off-tumor toxicity. Toxicity was encountered in patients who received high-avidity TCRs that recognized either the MART-1 or gp100 melanoma-melanocyte antigens, in mice when targeting melanocyte antigens, in patients with renal cancer using a CAR targeting carbonic anhydrase 9 and in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer.\n\nToxicities can also result when previously unknown cross-reactivities are seen that target normal self-proteins expressed in vital organs. Cancer-testes antigen MAGE-A3 is not known to be expressed in any normal tissues. However, targeting an HLA-A*0201–restricted peptide in MAGE-A3 caused severe damage to gray matter in the brain, because this TCR also recognized a different but related epitope that is expressed at low levels in the brain. That CARs are potentially toxic to self-antigens was observed after infusion of CAR T cells specific for ERBB2. Two patients died when treated with an HLA-A1–restricted MAGE-A3–specific TCR whose affinity was enhanced by a site-specific mutagenesis.\n\nCancer-testis antigens are a family of intracellular proteins that are expressed during fetal development, but with little expression in normal adult tissues. More than 100 such molecules are epigenetically up-regulated in from 10 to 80% of cancer types. However, they lack high levels of protein expression. Approximately 10% of common cancers appear to express enough protein to be of interest for antitumor T cells. Low levels of some cancer-testes antigens are expressed in normal tissues, with associated toxicities. The NYESO-1 cancer-testes antigen has been targeted via a human TCR transduced into autologous cells. ORs were seen in 5 of 11 patients with metastatic melanoma and 4 of 6 patients with highly refractory synovial cell sarcoma.\n\n“Suicide switches” let doctors kill engineered T cells in emergencies which threaten patient survival.\n\nCytokine release syndrome is another side effect and can be a function of therapeutic effectiveness. As the tumor is destroyed, it releases large quantities of cell signaling protein molecules. This effect killed at least seven patients.\n\nMolecules shared among tumors and nonessential normal organs represent potential ACT targets, despite the related toxicity. For example, the CD19 molecule is expressed on more than 90% of B cell malignancies and on non-plasma B cells at all differentiation stages and has been successfully used to treat patients with follicular lymphoma, large-cell lymphomas, chronic lymphocytic leukemia and acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Toxicity against CD19 results in B cell loss in circulation and in bone marrow that can be overcome by periodic immunoglobulin infusions.\n\nMultiple other B cell antigens are being studied as targets, including CD22, CD23, ROR-1 and the immunoglobulin light-chain idiotype expressed by the individual cancer. CARs targeting either CD33 or CD123 have been studied as a therapy for patients with acute myeloid leukemia, though the expression of these molecules on normal precursors can lead to prolonged myeloablation. BCMA is a tumor necrosis factor receptor family protein expressed on mature B cells and plasma cells and can be targeted on multiple myeloma.\n\n", "id": "25514357", "title": "Adoptive cell transfer"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26315274", "text": "Symmetry breaking and cortical rotation\n\nThis article is about the concept in biology. For the concept in physics, see Symmetry breaking.\n\nSymmetry breaking is the process by which uniformity is broken, or the number of points to view invariance are reduced, to generate a more structured and improbable state. That is to say, symmetry breaking is the event where symmetry along a particular axis is lost to establish a polarity. Polarity is a measure for a biological system to distinguish poles along an axis. This measure is important because it is the first step to building complexity. For example, during organismal development, one of the first steps for the embryo is to distinguish its dorsal-ventral axis. The symmetry-breaking event that occurs here will determine which end of this axis will be the ventral side, and which end will be the dorsal side. Once this distinction is made, then all the structures that are located along this axis can develop at the proper location. As an example, during human development, the embryo needs to establish where is ‘back’ and where is ‘front’ before complex structures, such as the spine and lungs, can develop in the right location (where the lungs is placed ‘in front’ of the spine). This relationship between symmetry breaking and complexity was articulated by P.W. Anderson. He speculated that increasing levels of broken symmetry in many-body systems correlates with increasing complexity and functional specialization. In a biological perspective, the more complex an organism is, the higher number of symmetry-breaking events can be found. Without symmetry breaking, building complexity in organisms would be very difficult.\n\nThe importance of symmetry breaking in biology is also reflected in the fact that it’s found at all scales. Symmetry breaking can be found at the macromolecular level, at the subcellular level and even at the tissues and organ level. It’s also interesting to note that most asymmetry on a higher scale is a reflection of symmetry breaking on a lower scale. Cells first need to establish a polarity through a symmetry-breaking event before tissues and organs themselves can be polar. For example, one model proposes that left-right body axis asymmetry in vertebrates is determined by asymmetry of cilia rotation during early development, which will produces a constant, unidirectional flow. However, there is also evidence that earlier asymmetries in serotonin distribution and ion-channel mRNA and protein localization occur in zebrafish, chicken and \"Xenopus\" development, and similar to observations of intrinsic chirality generated by the cytoskeleton leading to organ and whole organism asymmetries in \"Arabidopsis\" this itself seems to be controlled from the macromolecular level by the cytoskeleton.\n\nThere are several examples of symmetry breaking that are currently being studied. One of the most studied examples is the cortical rotation during \"Xenopus\" development, where this rotation acts as the symmetry-breaking event that determines the dorsal-ventral axis of the developing embryo. This example is discussed in more detail below.\n<br>Another example that involves symmetry breaking is the establishment of dendrites and axon during neuron development, and the PAR protein network in \"C. elegans\". It is thought that a protein called shootin-1 determines which outgrowth in neurons eventually becomes the axon, at it does this by breaking symmetry and accumulating in only one outgrowth. The PAR protein network works under similar mechanisms, where the certain PAR proteins, which are initially homogenous throughout the cell, break their symmetry and are segregated to different ends of the zygote to establish a polarity during development.\n\nCortical rotation is a phenomenon that seems to be limited to \"Xenopus\" and few ancient teleosts, however the underlying mechanisms of cortical rotation have conserved elements that are found in other chordates. Research in this area is on-going and changes to the model described below are to be expected.\nIn fact, the origin of asymmetry in cell division, cell polarity and the mechanism that breaks the symmetry continue to be topics of intense research. Since the early 1990s, many discoveries have been made leading to a sound model of the mechanism for symmetry breaking. This article will focus solely on symmetry breaking in the \"Xenopus\" embryo, an animal model that has wide application.\n\nA sperm can bind a \"Xenopus\" egg at any position of the pigmented animal hemisphere; however once bound this position then determines the dorsal side of the animal. The dorsal side of the egg is always directly opposite the sperm entry point. The reason being the sperm's centriole acts as an organizing center for the egg’s microtubules. While this observation has been known for quite some time, the question of how all of this works is more complicated. The molecular mechanisms driving dorsal-ventral asymmetry are a fine example of simplicity and complexity inherent in biology.\n\nA series of experiments utilizing UV irradiation, cold temperature and pressure (all of which cause microtubule depolymerization) demonstrated that without polymerized microtubules cortical rotation did not occur and resulted in a mutant ventral phenotype. Another study also revealed that mutant phenotype could be rescued (returned to normal) by physically turning the embryo, thus mimicking cortical rotation and demonstrating that microtubules were not the determinant of dorsal development. From this it was hypothesized that there were other elements within the embryo being moved during cortical rotation.\n\nTo identify these elements, researchers looked for mRNA and protein that demonstrated localization to either the vegetal pole or the dorsal side of the embryo to find candidates. The early candidates for the determinant were β-catenin and disheveled (Dsh). When maternal β-catenin mRNA was degraded in the oocyte, the resulting embryo developed into mutant ventral phenotype and this could be rescued by injecting the fertilized egg with β-catenin mRNA. β-catenin is obversed to be enriched in the dorsal side of the embryo following cortical rotation. The Dsh protein was fused to a GFP and tracked during cortical rotation, it was observed to be in vesicles that were couriered along microtubules to the dorsal side. This led researchers to look into other candidates of the Wnt pathway. Wnt 11 was found to be located specifically at the vegetal pole prior to cortical rotation and is moved to the dorsal side where it activates the wnt signaling pathway. VegT, a T-box transcription factor, is localized to the vegetal cortex and upon cortical rotation is released in a gradient fashion into the embryo to regulate mesoderm development. VegT activates Wnt expression, so while not acted on or moved during cortical rotation, it is active in dorsal-ventral axis formation.\n\nThe question still remains, how are these molecules being moved to the dorsal side? This is still not completely known, however evidence suggests that microtubule bundles within the cortex are interacting with kinesin (plus-end directed) motors to become organized into parallel arrays within the cortex and this motion of the motors is the cause of the rotation of the cortex. Also unclear is whether Wnt 11 is the main dorsal determinant or is β-catenin also required, as these two molecules have both been demonstrated to be necessary and sufficient for dorsal development. This along with all of the other factors are important for activating Nodal genes that propagate normal dorsoventral development.\n\nFor reviews of the general topic see.\n", "id": "26315274", "title": "Symmetry breaking and cortical rotation"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27382300", "text": "Cell cycle analysis\n\nCell cycle analysis by DNA content measurement is a method that most frequently employs flow cytometry to distinguish cells in different phases of the cell cycle. Before analysis, the cells are usually permeabilised and treated with a fluorescent dye that stains DNA quantitatively, such as propidium iodide (PI) or 4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI). The fluorescence intensity of the stained cells correlates with the amount of DNA they contain. As the DNA content doubles during the S phase, the DNA content (and thereby intensity of fluorescence) of cells in the G phase and G phase (before S), in the S phase, and in the G phase and M phase (after S) identifies the cell cycle phase position in the major phases (G/G versus S versus G/M phase) of the cell cycle. The cellular DNA content of individual cells is often plotted as their frequency histogram to provide information about relative frequency (percentage) of cells in the major phases of the cell cycle. \n\nCell cycle anomalies revealed on the DNA content frequency histogram are often observed after different types of cell damage, for example such DNA damage that interrupts the cell cycle progression at certain checkpoints. Such an arrest of the cell cycle progression can lead either to an effective DNA repair, which may prevent transformation of normal into a cancer cell (carcinogenesis), or to cell death, often by the mode of apoptosis. An arrest of cells in G or G is often seen as a result of lack of nutrients (growth factors), for example after serum deprivation.\nCell cycle analysis was first described in 1969 at Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory by a group from the University of California using the Feulgen staining technique. The first protocol for cell cycle analysis using propidium iodide staining was presented in 1975 by Awtar Krishan from Harvard Medical School and is still widely cited today.\n\nMultiparameter analysis of the cell cycle includes, in addition to measurement of cellular DNA content, other cell cycle related constituents/features. The concurrent measurement of cellular DNA and RNA content, or DNA susceptibility to denaturation at low pH using the metachromatic dye acridine orange, reveals the G, G, and G cell cycle compartments and also makes it possible to discriminate between S, G and mitotic cells. The cells in G are quiescent, temporarily withdrawn from the cell cycle (also identifiable as G), the G are in the growth phase while G are the cells just prior entering S, with their growth (RNA and protein content, size) similar to that of the cells initiating DNA replication. Similar cell cycle compartments are also recognized by multiparameter analysis that includes measurement of expression of cyclin D1, cyclin E, cyclin A and cyclin B1, each in relation to DNA content Concurrent measurement of DNA content and of incorporation of DNA precursor 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (BrdU) by flow cytometry is an especially useful assay, that has been widely used in analysis of the cell cycle in vitro and in vivo. However, the incorporation of 5-ethynyl-2'-deoxyuridine (EdU), the precursor whose detection offers certain advantages over BrdU, has now become the preferred methodology do detect DNA replicating (S-phase) cells. \n\n The first step in preparing cells for cell cycle analysis is permeabilisation of the cells' plasma membranes. This is usually done by incubating them in a buffer solution containing a mild detergent such as Triton X-100 or NP-40, or by fixating them in ethanol. Most fluorescent DNA dyes (one of exceptions is Hoechst 33342) are not plasma membrane permeant, that is, unable to pass through an intact cell membrane. Permeabilisation is therefore crucial for the success of the next step, the staining of the cells.\n\nPrior to (or during the staining step) the cells are often treated with RNase A to remove RNAs. This is important because \ncertain dyes that stain DNA will also stain RNA, thus creating artefacts that would distort the results. An exception is the metachromatic fluorochrome acridine orange, which under the specific staining protocol can differentially stain both, RNA (generating red luminescence) and DNA (green fluorescence), or in another protocol, after removal of RNA and partial DNA denaturation, to differentially stain double-stranded DNA (green fluorescence) versus single-stranded DNA(red luminescence). Aside from propidium iodide and acridine orange, quantifiable dyes that are frequently used include (but are not limited to) DRAQ5, 7-Aminoactinomycin D, DAPI and Hoechst 33342.\n\nSince cells and especially fixed cells tend to stick together, cell aggregates have to be excluded from analysis through a process called \"doublet discrimination\". This is important because a doublet of two G/G cells has the same total content of DNA and thus the same fluorescence intensity as a single G/M cell. Unless recognized as such the G/G doublets would contribute to false positive identification and count of G/M cells.\n\nThe Nicoletti assay, named after its inventor, the Italian physician Ildo Nicoletti, is a modified form of cell cycle analysis. It is used to detect and quantify apoptosis, a form of programmed cell death, by analysing cells with a DNA content less than 2n (\"sub-G/G cells\"). Such cells are usually the result of apoptotic DNA fragmentation: during apoptosis, the DNA is degraded by cellular endonucleases. Therefore, nuclei of apoptotic cells contain less DNA than nuclei of healthy G/G cells, resulting in a sub-G/G peak in the fluorescence histogram that can be used to determine the relative amount of apoptotic cells in a sample.This method was developed and first described in 1991 by Nicoletti and co-workers at Perugia University School of Medicine. An optimised protocol developed by two of the authors of the original publication was published in 2006. It should be noted however that the objects measured within the sub-G/G peak, with DNA content lesser than 5% of that of the GG peak, in all probability are apoptotic bodies and thus do not represent individual apoptotic cells \n\n", "id": "27382300", "title": "Cell cycle analysis"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4530419", "text": "Genomic island\n\nA genomic island (GI) is part of a genome that has evidence of horizontal origins. The term is usually used in microbiology, especially with regard to bacteria. A GI can code for many functions, can be involved in symbiosis or pathogenesis, and may help an organism's adaptation. Many sub-classes of GIs exist that are based on the function that they confer. For example, a GI associated with pathogenesis is often called a pathogenicity island (PAIs), while GIs that contain many antibiotic resistant genes are referred to as antibiotic resistance islands. The same GI can occur in distantly related species as a result of various types of lateral gene transfer (transformation, conjugation, transduction). This can be determined by base composition analysis, as well as phylogeny estimations.\n\nVarious genomic island predictions programs have been developed. These tools can be broadly grouped into sequence based methods and comparative genomics/phylogeny based methods.\n\nSequence based methods depend on the naturally occurring variation that exists between the genome sequence composition of different species. Genomic regions that show abnormal sequence composition (such as nucleotide bias or codon bias) suggests that these regions may have been horizontally transferred. Two major problems with these methods are that false predictions can occur due to natural variation in the genome (sometimes due to highly expressed genes) and that horizontally transferred DNA will ameliorate (change to the host genome) over time; therefore, limiting predictions to only recently acquired GIs.\n\nComparative genomics based methods try to identify regions that show signs that they have been horizontally transferred using information from several related species. For example, a genomic region that is present in one species, but is not present in several other related species suggests that the region may have been horizontally transferred. The alternative explanations are (i) that the region was present in the common ancestor but has been lost in all the other species being compared, or (ii) that the region was absent in the common ancestor but was acquired through mutation and selection in the species in which it is still found. The argument for multiple deletions of the region would be strengthened if there is evidence from outgroups that the region was present in the common ancestor, or if the phylogeny implies relatively few actual deletion events would be required. The argument for acquisition via mutation would be strengthened if the species with the region is known to have diverged substantially from the other species, or if the region in question is small. The plausibility of either (i) or (ii) would be modified if taxon sampling omitted many extinct species that may have possessed the region, and particularly if extinction was correlated with the presence of the region.\n\nOne example of a method that integrates several of the most accurate GI prediction methods is IslandViewer.\n\nIn bacteria, many type 3 secretion systems and type 4 secretion systems are located on regions of DNA called genomic islands. These \"islands\" are characterised by their large size(>10 Kb), their frequent association with tRNA-encoding genes and a different G+C content compared with the rest of the genome. Many genomic islands are flanked by repeat structures and carry fragments of other mobile elements such as phages and plasmids. Some genomic islands can excise themselves spontaneously from the chromosome and can be transferred to other suitable recipients. \n\n", "id": "4530419", "title": "Genomic island"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26982208", "text": "Cell potency\n\nCell potency is a cell's ability to differentiate into other cell types.\nThe more cell types a cell can differentiate into, the greater its potency. Potency is also described as the gene activation potential within a cell which like a continuum begins with totipotency to designate a cell with the most differentiation potential, pluripotency, multipotency, oligopotency and finally unipotency. \nTotipotency (Lat. \"totipotentia,\" \"ability for all [things]\") is the ability of a single cell to divide and produce all of the differentiated cells in an organism. Spores and zygotes are examples of totipotent cells.\nIn the spectrum of cell potency, totipotency represents the cell with the greatest differentiation potential.\n\nIt is possible for a fully differentiated cell to return to a state of totipotency. This conversion to totipotency is complex, not fully understood and the subject of recent research. Research in 2011 has shown that cells may differentiate not into a fully totipotent cell, but instead into a \"complex cellular variation\" of totipotency. Stem cells resembling totipotent blastomeres from 2-cell stage embryos can arise spontaneously in mouse embryonic stem cell cultures and also can be induced to arise more frequently in vitro through down-regulation of the chromatin assembly activity of CAF-1.\n\nThe human development model is one which can be used to describe how totipotent cells arise. Human development begins when a sperm fertilizes an egg and the resulting fertilized egg creates a single totipotent cell, a zygote. In the first hours after fertilization, this zygote divides into identical totipotent cells, which can later develop into any of the three germ layers of a human (endoderm, mesoderm, or ectoderm), into cells of the cytotrophoblast layer or syncytiotrophoblast layer of the placenta. After reaching a 16-cell stage, the totipotent cells of the morula differentiate into cells that will eventually become either the blastocyst's Inner cell mass or the outer trophoblasts. Approximately four days after fertilization and after several cycles of cell division, these totipotent cells begin to specialize. The inner cell mass, the source of embryonic stem cells, becomes pluripotent.\n\nResearch on \"Caenorhabditis elegans\" suggests that multiple mechanisms including RNA regulation may play a role in maintaining totipotency at different stages of development in some species. Work with zebrafish and mammals suggest a further interplay between miRNA and RNA binding proteins (RBPs) in determining development differences.\n\nIn September 2013, a team from the Spanish national Cancer Research Centre was able for the first time to make adult cells from mice retreat to the characteristics of embryonic stem cells, thereby achieving totipotency.\n\nIn cell biology, pluripotency (Lat. \"pluripotentia,\" \"ability for many [things]\") refers to a stem cell that has the potential to differentiate into any of the three germ layers: endoderm (interior stomach lining, gastrointestinal tract, the lungs), mesoderm (muscle, bone, blood, urogenital), or ectoderm (epidermal tissues and nervous system). However, cell pluripotency is a continuum, ranging from the completely pluripotent cell that can form every cell of the embryo proper, e.g., embryonic stem cells and iPSCs (see below), to the incompletely or partially pluripotent cell that can form cells of all three germ layers but that may not exhibit all the characteristics of completely pluripotent cells.\n\nInduced pluripotent stem cells, commonly abbreviated as iPS cells or iPSCs are a type of pluripotent stem cell artificially derived from a non-pluripotent cell, typically an adult somatic cell, by inducing a \"forced\" expression of certain genes and transcription factors. These transcription factors play a key role in determining the state of these cells and also highlights the fact that these somatic cells do preserve the same genetic information as early embryonic cells. The ability to induce cells into a pluripotent state was initially pioneered in 2006 using mouse fibroblasts and four transcription factors, Oct4, Sox2, Klf4 and c-Myc; this technique, called reprogramming, earned Shinya Yamanaka and John Gurdon the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine 2012. This was then followed in 2007 by the successful induction of human iPSCs derived from human dermal fibroblasts using methods similar to those used for the induction of mouse cells. These induced cells exhibit similar traits to those of embryonic stem cells (ESCs) but do not require the use of embryos. Some of the similarities between ESCs and iPSCs include pluripotency, morphology, self-renewal ability, a trait that implies that they can divide and replicate indefinitely, and gene expression.\n\nEpigenetic factors are also thought to be involved in the actual reprogramming of somatic cells in order to induce pluripotency. It has been theorized that certain epigenetic factors might actually work to clear the original somatic epigenetic marks in order to acquire the new epigenetic marks that are part of achieving a pluripotent state. Chromatin is also reorganized in iPSCs and becomes like that found in ESCs in that it is less condensed and therefore more accessible. Euchromatin modifications are also common which is also consistent with the state of euchromatin found in ESCs.\n\nDue to their great similarity to ESCs, iPSCs have been of great interest to the medical and research community. iPSCs could potentially have the same therapeutic implications and applications as ESCs but without the controversial use of embryos in the process, a topic of great bioethical debate. In fact, the induced pluripotency of somatic cells into undifferentiated iPS cells was originally hailed as the end of the controversial use of embryonic stem cells. However, iPSCs were found to be potentially tumorigenic, and, despite advances, were never approved for clinical stage research in the United States. Setbacks such as low replication rates and early senescence have also been encountered when making iPSCs, hindering their use as ESCs replacements.\n\nAdditionally, it has been determined that the somatic expression of combined transcription factors can directly induce other defined somatic cell fates (transdifferentiation); researchers identified three neural-lineage-specific transcription factors that could directly convert mouse fibroblasts (skin cells) into fully functional neurons. This result challenges the terminal nature of cellular differentiation and the integrity of lineage commitment; and implies that with the proper tools, \"all\" cells are totipotent and may form all kinds of tissue.\n\nSome of the possible medical and therapeutic uses for iPSCs derived from patients include their use in cell and tissue transplants without the risk of rejection that is commonly encountered. iPSCs can potentially replace animal models unsuitable as well as in-vitro models used for disease research.\n\nRecent findings with respect to epiblasts before and after implantation have produced proposals for classifying pluripotency into two distinct phases: \"naive\" and \"primed\". The baseline stem cells commonly used in science that are referred as Embryonic stem cells (ESCs) are derived from a pre-implantation epiblast; such epiblast is able to generate the entire fetus, and one epiblast cell is able to contribute to all cell lineages if injected into another blastocyst. On the other hand, several marked differences can be observed between the pre- and post-implantation epiblasts, such as their difference in morphology, in which the epiblast after implantation changes its morphology into a cup-like shape called the \"egg cylinder\" as well as chromosomal alteration in which one of the X-chromosomes undergoes random inactivation in the early stage of the egg cylinder, known as X-inactivation. During this development, the egg cylinder epiblast cells are systematically targeted by Fibroblast growth factors, Wnt signaling, and other inductive factors via the surrounding yolk sac and the trophoblast tissue, such that they become instructively specific according to the spatial organization. Another major difference that was observed, with respect to cell potency, is that post-implantation epiblast stem cells are unable to contribute to blastocyst chimeras, which distinguishes them from other known pluripotent stem cells. Cell lines derived from such post-implantation epiblasts are referred to as epiblast-derived stem cells which were first derived in laboratory in 2007; despite their nomenclature, that both ESCs and EpiSCs are derived from epiblasts, just at difference phases of development, and that pluripotency is still intact in the post-implantation epiblast, as demonstrated by the conserved expression of Nanog, Fut4, and Oct-4 in EpiSCs, until somitogenesis and can be reversed midway through induced expression of Oct-4.\n\nMultipotency describes progenitor cells which have the gene activation potential to differentiate into discrete cell types. For example, a multipotent blood stem cell is a hematopoietic stem cell (HSC)—and this cell type can differentiate itself into several types of blood cell types like lymphocytes, monocytes, neutrophils, etc., but it is still ambiguous whether HSC possess the ability to differente into brain cells, bone cells or other non-blood cell types (need citation).\n\nNew research related to multipotent cells suggests that multipotent cells may be capable of conversion into unrelated cell types. In another case, human umbilical cord blood stem cells were converted into human neurons. Research is also focusing on converting multipotent cells into pluripotent cells.\n\nMultipotent cells are found in many, but not all human cell types. Multipotent cells have been found in cord blood, adipose tissue, cardiac cells, bone marrow, and mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) which are found in the third molar.\n\nMSCs may prove to be a valuable source for stem cells from molars at 8–10 years of age, before adult dental calcification. MSCs can differentiate into osteoblasts, chondrocytes, and adipocytes.\n\nIn biology, oligopotency is the ability of progenitor cells to differentiate into a few cell types. It is a degree of potency. Examples of oligopotent stem cells are the lymphoid or myeloid stem cells.\nA lymphoid cell specifically, can give rise to various blood cells such as B and T cells, however, not to a different blood cell type like a red blood cell. Examples of progenitor cells are vascular stem cells that have the capacity to become both endothelial or smooth muscle cells.\n\nIn cell biology, a unipotent cell is the concept that one stem cell has the capacity to differentiate into only one cell type. It is currently unclear if true unipotent stem cells exist. Hepatoblasts, which differentiate into hepatocytes (which constitute most of the liver) or cholangiocytes (epithelial cells of the bile duct), are bipotent. A close synonym for \"unipotent cell\" is \"precursor cell.\"\n\n", "id": "26982208", "title": "Cell potency"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26450711", "text": "Intracellular digestion\n\nEvery organism requires energy to be active. However, to obtain energy from its outside environment, cells must not only retrieve molecules from their surroundings but also break them down. This process is known as intracellular digestion. In its broadest sense, intracellular digestion is the breakdown of substances within the cytoplasm of a cell. In detail, a phagocyte's duty is obtaining food particles and digesting it in a vacuole. For example, following phagocytosis, the ingested particle (or phagosome) fuses with a lysosome containing hydrolytic enzymes to form a phagolysosome; the pathogens or food particles within the phagosome are then digested by the lysosome's enzymes.\n\nIntracellular digestion can also refer to the process in which animals that \"lack\" a digestive tract bring food items into the cell for the purposes of digestion for nutritional needs. This kind of intracellular digestion occurs in many unicellular protozoans, in Pycnogonida, in some molluscs, Cnidaria and Porifera. There is another type of digestion, called extracellular digestion. In amphioxus, digestion is both extracellular and intracellular.\n\nIntracellular digestion is divided into heterophagic digestion and autophagic digestion. These two types take place in the lysosome and they both have very specific functions. Heterophagic intracellular digestion has an important job which is to break down all molecules that are brought into a cell by endocytosis. The degraded molecules need to be delivered to the cytoplasm; however, this will not be possible if the molecules are not hydrolyzed in the lysosome. Autophagic intracellular digestion is processed in the cell, which means it digests the internal molecules.\nGenerally, autophagy includes three small branches, which are macroautophagy, microautophagy, and chaperone-mediated autophagy.\n\nMost organisms that use intracellular digestion belong to Kingdom Protista, such as amoeba and paramecium.\n\nAmoeba\n\nAmoeba uses pseudopodia to capture food for nutrition in a process called phagocytosis.\n\nParamecium\n\nParamecium uses cilia in the oral groove to bring food into the mouth pore which goes to the gullet. At the end of the gullet, a food vacuole forms. Undigested food is carried to the anal pore.\n\nEuglena\n\nEuglena is photosynthetic but also engulfs and digests microorganisms.\n\n1 Roberts, M. B. V. \"Biology: A Functional Approach\". Nelson Thornes. .\n\n2 Jamieson, G. A.; Robinson, D. M. \"Mammalian Cell Membranes: Volume 2: The Diversity of Membranes\". Elsevier. .\n\n3 Anderson, O. Roger (1 January 1970). \"Intracellular Digestion\". \"The American Biology Teacher\". 32 (8): 461–467. doi:10.2307/4443206.\n\n4 Glick, Danielle; Barth, Sandra; Macleod, Kay F. (21 November 2016). \"Autophagy: cellular and molecular mechanisms\". \"The Journal of pathology\". 221 (1): 3–12. doi:. ISSN 0022-3417.\n\n5 Mizushima, Noboru (15 November 2007). \"Autophagy: process and function\". \"Genes & Development\". 21(22): 2861–2873. doi:. ISSN 0890-9369.\n", "id": "26450711", "title": "Intracellular digestion"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4366564", "text": "CellProfiler\n\nCellProfiler is free, open-source, public domain software designed to enable biologists without training in computer vision or programming to quantitatively measure phenotypes from thousands of images automatically. Advanced algorithms for image analysis are available as individual modules that can be placed in sequential order together to form a pipeline; the pipeline is then used to identify and measure \nbiological objects and features in images, particularly those obtained through fluorescence microscopy.\n\nDistributions are available for Microsoft Windows, the classic Mac OS, macOS, and Linux. The source code for CellProfiler is freely available. CellProfiler is developed by the Broad Institute's Imaging Platform.\n\nCellProfiler can read and analyze most common microscopy image formats. Biologists typically use CellProfiler to identify objects of interest (e.g. cells, colonies, \"C. elegans\" worms) and then measure their properties of interest. Specialized modules for illumination correction may be applied as pre-processing step to remove distortions due to uneven lighting. Object identification (segmentation) is performed through machine learning or image thresholding, recognition and division of clumped objects, and removal or merging of objects on the basis of size or shape. Each of these steps are customizable by the user for their unique image assay.\n\nA wide variety of measurements can be generated for each identified cell or subcellular compartment, including morphology, intensity, and texture among others. These measurements are accessible by using built-in viewing and plotting data tools, exporting in a comma-delimited spreadsheet format, or importing into a MySQL or SQLite database.\n\nCellProfiler interfaces with the high-performance scientific libraries NumPy and SciPy for many mathematical operations, the Open Microscopy Environment Consortium’s Bio-Formats library for reading more than 100 image file formats, ImageJ for use of plugins and macros, and ilastik for pixel-based classification. While designed and optimized for large numbers of two-dimensional images (the most common high-content screening image format), CellProfiler supports analysis of small-scale experiments and time-lapse movies.\n\nCellProfiler was released in December 2005 by scientists from the Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and Massachusetts Institute of Technology. It is currently developed and maintained by the Carpenter Lab at the Imaging Platform of the Broad Institute.\n\nOriginally developed in MATLAB, it was re-written in Python and released as CellProfiler 2.0 in 2010. Version 3.0, supporting volumetric analysis of 3D image stacks and optional deep learning modules, was released in October 2017.\n\nBecause CellProfiler is a free, open-source project, anyone can develop their own image processing algorithms as a new module for CellProfiler and contribute it to the project. The CellProfiler website contains a forum for discussion where new users can have their questions answered, usually by the creators of the project.\n", "id": "4366564", "title": "CellProfiler"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27343053", "text": "Epixenosomes\n\nEpixenosomes are a group of bacteria in the phylum Verrucomicrobia that form a symbiosis with marine ciliates of the genus \"Euplotidium,\" where they help to defend their ciliate hosts against predators.\n\nEpixenosomes possess two distinct developmental phases linked to the host cell cycle. Stage I epixenosomes are spherical, 0.5 μm in diameter and are surrounded by two membranes. They divide by direct binary fission. Stage II epixenosomes are egg-shaped (2.2 μm in length and 1 μm in width) and show complex organization with different cytoplasmic compartments, more complicated than the majority of prokaryotic organisms. They contain an extrusive apparatus within a proteinaceous matrix, although apparently not membrane-bound, which differs from the remaining cytoplasm. A functional cell compartmentalization has also been evidenced. \n\nTheir phylogenetic position was originally unclear, because they appeared to have both prokaryote-like traits, such as binary fission, and eukaryote-like traits, such as intracellular membranes. However, molecular phylogenetics showed that they are actually bacteria from the phylum Verrucomicrobia. \n\nEpixenosomes live on the dorsal surface of their hosts, marine ciliates in the genus \"Euplotidium\". The name \"epixenosomes\" comes from the ancient Greek επι ξενον σομα, meaning \"external alien body\", referring to their extracellular position on the host. The extrusive apparatus ejects its contents when triggered; this process helps to defend the ciliate host against predators. Although \"Euplotidium\" can grow and reproduce without epixenosomes, those with epixenosomes have much higher survival when exposed to predators such as the ciliate \"Litonotus\".\n\nExternal signals of unknown origin are detected by the membrane receptors located at the top of the organism. The consequent activation of the adenylate cyclase-cAMP system triggers the ejection of the extrusive apparatus, with the formation of a hollow tube, about 40 μm long, terminating in a head mainly consisting of the apical portion of the epixenosome (the region containing DNA).\n\nThe extrusive apparatus is surrounded by a basket of tubules. Experiments with antitubulin drugs and immunocytochemical analyses at the optical and electron microscopical level suggested that these tubules consist of tubulin, which is a eukaryotic protein. Although some free-living Verrucomicrobia are reported to have tubulin genes, they have not been found to have tubular structures like those of epixenosomes.\n\n", "id": "27343053", "title": "Epixenosomes"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4230", "text": "Cell (biology)\n\nThe cell (from Latin \"cella\", meaning \"small room\") is the basic structural, functional, and biological unit of all known living organisms. A cell is the smallest unit of life that can replicate independently, and cells are often called the \"building blocks of life\". The study of cells is called cell biology.\n\nCells consist of cytoplasm enclosed within a membrane, which contains many biomolecules such as proteins and nucleic acids. Organisms can be classified as unicellular (consisting of a single cell; including bacteria) or multicellular (including plants and animals). While the number of cells in plants and animals varies from species to species, humans contain more than 10 trillion (10) cells. Most plant and animal cells are visible only under a microscope, with dimensions between 1 and 100 micrometres.\n\nThe cell was discovered by Robert Hooke in 1665, who named the biological units for their resemblance to cells inhabited by Christian monks in a monastery. Cell theory, first developed in 1839 by Matthias Jakob Schleiden and Theodor Schwann, states that all organisms are composed of one or more cells, that cells are the fundamental unit of structure and function in all living organisms, that all cells come from preexisting cells, and that all cells contain the hereditary information necessary for regulating cell functions and for transmitting information to the next generation of cells. Cells emerged on Earth at least 3.5 billion years ago.\n\nCells are of two types, eukaryotic, which contain a nucleus, and prokaryotic, which do not. Prokaryotes are single-celled organisms, while eukaryotes can be either single-celled or multicellular.\n\nProkaryotic cells were the first form of life on Earth, characterised by having vital biological processes including cell signaling and being self-sustaining. They are simpler and smaller than eukaryotic cells, and lack membrane-bound organelles such as the nucleus. Prokaryotes include two of the three domains of life, bacteria and archaea. The DNA of a prokaryotic cell consists of a single chromosome that is in direct contact with the cytoplasm. The nuclear region in the cytoplasm is called the nucleoid. Most prokaryotes are the smallest of all organisms ranging from 0.5 to 2.0 µm in diameter.\n\nA prokaryotic cell has three architectural regions:\n\nPlants, animals, fungi, slime moulds, protozoa, and algae are all eukaryotic. These cells are about fifteen times wider than a typical prokaryote and can be as much as a thousand times greater in volume. The main distinguishing feature of eukaryotes as compared to prokaryotes is compartmentalization: the presence of membrane-bound organelles (compartments) in which specific metabolic activities take place. Most important among these is a cell nucleus, an organelle that houses the cell's DNA. This nucleus gives the eukaryote its name, which means \"true kernel (nucleus)\". Other differences include:\n\nAll cells, whether prokaryotic or eukaryotic, have a membrane that envelops the cell, regulates what moves in and out (selectively permeable), and maintains the electric potential of the cell. Inside the membrane, the cytoplasm takes up most of the cell's volume. All cells (except red blood cells which lack a cell nucleus and most organelles to accommodate maximum space for hemoglobin) possess DNA, the hereditary material of genes, and RNA, containing the information necessary to build various proteins such as enzymes, the cell's primary machinery. There are also other kinds of biomolecules in cells. This article lists these primary components of the cell, then briefly describes their function.\n\nThe cell membrane, or plasma membrane, is a biological membrane that surrounds the cytoplasm of a cell. In animals, the plasma membrane is the outer boundary of the cell, while in plants and prokaryotes it is usually covered by a cell wall. This membrane serves to separate and protect a cell from its surrounding environment and is made mostly from a double layer of phospholipids, which are amphiphilic (partly hydrophobic and partly hydrophilic). Hence, the layer is called a phospholipid bilayer, or sometimes a fluid mosaic membrane. Embedded within this membrane is a variety of protein molecules that act as channels and pumps that move different molecules into and out of the cell. The membrane is semi-permeable, and selectively permeable, in that it can either let a substance (molecule or ion) pass through freely, pass through to a limited extent or not pass through at all. Cell surface membranes also contain receptor proteins that allow cells to detect external signaling molecules such as hormones.\n\nThe cytoskeleton acts to organize and maintain the cell's shape; anchors organelles in place; helps during endocytosis, the uptake of external materials by a cell, and cytokinesis, the separation of daughter cells after cell division; and moves parts of the cell in processes of growth and mobility. The eukaryotic cytoskeleton is composed of microfilaments, intermediate filaments and microtubules. There are a great number of proteins associated with them, each controlling a cell's structure by directing, bundling, and aligning filaments. The prokaryotic cytoskeleton is less well-studied but is involved in the maintenance of cell shape, polarity and cytokinesis. The subunit protein of microfilaments is a small, monomeric protein called actin. The subunit of microtubules is a dimeric molecule called tubulin. Intermediate filaments are heteropolymers whose subunits vary among the cell types in different tissues. But some of the subunit protein of intermediate filaments include vimentin, desmin, lamin (lamins A, B and C), keratin (multiple acidic and basic keratins), neurofilament proteins (NF–L, NF–M).\n\nTwo different kinds of genetic material exist: deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and ribonucleic acid (RNA). Cells use DNA for their long-term information storage. The biological information contained in an organism is encoded in its DNA sequence. RNA is used for information transport (e.g., mRNA) and enzymatic functions (e.g., ribosomal RNA). Transfer RNA (tRNA) molecules are used to add amino acids during protein translation.\n\nProkaryotic genetic material is organized in a simple circular DNA molecule (the bacterial chromosome) in the nucleoid region of the cytoplasm. Eukaryotic genetic material is divided into different, linear molecules called chromosomes inside a discrete nucleus, usually with additional genetic material in some organelles like mitochondria and chloroplasts (see endosymbiotic theory).\n\nA human cell has genetic material contained in the cell nucleus (the nuclear genome) and in the mitochondria (the mitochondrial genome). In humans the nuclear genome is divided into 46 linear DNA molecules called chromosomes, including 22 homologous chromosome pairs and a pair of sex chromosomes. The mitochondrial genome is a circular DNA molecule distinct from the nuclear DNA. Although the mitochondrial DNA is very small compared to nuclear chromosomes, it codes for 13 proteins involved in mitochondrial energy production and specific tRNAs.\n\nForeign genetic material (most commonly DNA) can also be artificially introduced into the cell by a process called transfection. This can be transient, if the DNA is not inserted into the cell's genome, or stable, if it is. Certain viruses also insert their genetic material into the genome.\n\nOrganelles are parts of the cell which are adapted and/or specialized for carrying out one or more vital functions, analogous to the organs of the human body (such as the heart, lung, and kidney, with each organ performing a different function). Both eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells have organelles, but prokaryotic organelles are generally simpler and are not membrane-bound.\n\nThere are several types of organelles in a cell. Some (such as the nucleus and golgi apparatus) are typically solitary, while others (such as mitochondria, chloroplasts, peroxisomes and lysosomes) can be numerous (hundreds to thousands). The cytosol is the gelatinous fluid that fills the cell and surrounds the organelles.\n\n\n\nMany cells also have structures which exist wholly or partially outside the cell membrane. These structures are notable because they are not protected from the external environment by the semipermeable cell membrane. In order to assemble these structures, their components must be carried across the cell membrane by export processes.\n\nMany types of prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells have a cell wall. The cell wall acts to protect the cell mechanically and chemically from its environment, and is an additional layer of protection to the cell membrane. Different types of cell have cell walls made up of different materials; plant cell walls are primarily made up of cellulose, fungi cell walls are made up of chitin and bacteria cell walls are made up of peptidoglycan.\n\nA gelatinous capsule is present in some bacteria outside the cell membrane and cell wall. The capsule may be polysaccharide as in pneumococci, meningococci or polypeptide as \"Bacillus anthracis\" or hyaluronic acid as in streptococci.\nCapsules are not marked by normal staining protocols and can be detected by India ink or methyl blue; which allows for higher contrast between the cells for observation.\n\nFlagella are organelles for cellular mobility. The bacterial flagellum stretches from cytoplasm through the cell membrane(s) and extrudes through the cell wall. They are long and thick thread-like appendages, protein in nature. A different type of flagellum is found in archaea and a different type is found in eukaryotes.\n\nA fimbria also known as a pilus is a short, thin, hair-like filament found on the surface of bacteria. Fimbriae, or pili are formed of a protein called pilin (antigenic) and are responsible for attachment of bacteria to specific receptors of human cell (cell adhesion). There are special types of specific pili involved in bacterial conjugation.\n\nBetween successive cell divisions, cells grow through the functioning of cellular metabolism. Cell metabolism is the process by which individual cells process nutrient molecules. Metabolism has two distinct divisions: catabolism, in which the cell breaks down complex molecules to produce energy and reducing power, and anabolism, in which the cell uses energy and reducing power to construct complex molecules and perform other biological functions.\nComplex sugars consumed by the organism can be broken down into simpler sugar molecules called monosaccharides such as glucose. Once inside the cell, glucose is broken down to make adenosine triphosphate (ATP), a molecule that possesses readily available energy, through two different pathways.\n\nCell division involves a single cell (called a \"mother cell\") dividing into two daughter cells. This leads to growth in multicellular organisms (the growth of tissue) and to procreation (vegetative reproduction) in unicellular organisms. Prokaryotic cells divide by binary fission, while eukaryotic cells usually undergo a process of nuclear division, called mitosis, followed by division of the cell, called cytokinesis. A diploid cell may also undergo meiosis to produce haploid cells, usually four. Haploid cells serve as gametes in multicellular organisms, fusing to form new diploid cells.\n\nDNA replication, or the process of duplicating a cell's genome, always happens when a cell divides through mitosis or binary fission. This occurs during the S phase of the cell cycle.\n\nIn meiosis, the DNA is replicated only once, while the cell divides twice. DNA replication only occurs before meiosis I. DNA replication does not occur when the cells divide the second time, in meiosis II. Replication, like all cellular activities, requires specialized proteins for carrying out the job.\n\nCells are capable of synthesizing new proteins, which are essential for the modulation and maintenance of cellular activities. This process involves the formation of new protein molecules from amino acid building blocks based on information encoded in DNA/RNA. Protein synthesis generally consists of two major steps: transcription and translation.\n\nTranscription is the process where genetic information in DNA is used to produce a complementary RNA strand. This RNA strand is then processed to give messenger RNA (mRNA), which is free to migrate through the cell. mRNA molecules bind to protein-RNA complexes called ribosomes located in the cytosol, where they are translated into polypeptide sequences. The ribosome mediates the formation of a polypeptide sequence based on the mRNA sequence. The mRNA sequence directly relates to the polypeptide sequence by binding to transfer RNA (tRNA) adapter molecules in binding pockets within the ribosome. The new polypeptide then folds into a functional three-dimensional protein molecule.\n\nUnicellular organisms can move in order to find food or escape predators. Common mechanisms of motion include flagella and cilia.\n\nIn multicellular organisms, cells can move during processes such as wound healing, the immune response and cancer metastasis. For example, in wound healing in animals, white blood cells move to the wound site to kill the microorganisms that cause infection. Cell motility involves many receptors, crosslinking, bundling, binding, adhesion, motor and other proteins. The process is divided into three steps – protrusion of the leading edge of the cell, adhesion of the leading edge and de-adhesion at the cell body and rear, and cytoskeletal contraction to pull the cell forward. Each step is driven by physical forces generated by unique segments of the cytoskeleton.\n\nMulticellular organisms are organisms that consist of more than one cell, in contrast to single-celled organisms.\n\nIn complex multicellular organisms, cells specialize into different cell types that are adapted to particular functions. In mammals, major cell types include skin cells, muscle cells, neurons, blood cells, fibroblasts, stem cells, and others. Cell types differ both in appearance and function, yet are genetically identical. Cells are able to be of the same genotype but of different cell type due to the differential expression of the genes they contain.\n\nMost distinct cell types arise from a single totipotent cell, called a zygote, that differentiates into hundreds of different cell types during the course of development. Differentiation of cells is driven by different environmental cues (such as cell–cell interaction) and intrinsic differences (such as those caused by the uneven distribution of molecules during division).\n\nMulticellularity has evolved independently at least 25 times, including in some prokaryotes, like cyanobacteria, myxobacteria, actinomycetes, \"Magnetoglobus multicellularis\" or \"Methanosarcina\". However, complex multicellular organisms evolved only in six eukaryotic groups: animals, fungi, brown algae, red algae, green algae, and plants. It evolved repeatedly for plants (Chloroplastida), once or twice for animals, once for brown algae, and perhaps several times for fungi, slime molds, and red algae. Multicellularity may have evolved from colonies of interdependent organisms, from cellularization, or from organisms in symbiotic relationships.\n\nThe first evidence of multicellularity is from cyanobacteria-like organisms that lived between 3 and 3.5 billion years ago. Other early fossils of multicellular organisms include the contested Grypania spiralis and the fossils of the black shales of the Palaeoproterozoic Francevillian Group Fossil B Formation in Gabon.\n\nThe evolution of multicellularity from unicellular ancestors has been replicated in the laboratory, in evolution experiments using predation as the selective pressure.\n\nThe origin of cells has to do with the origin of life, which began the history of life on Earth.\n\nThere are several theories about the origin of small molecules that led to life on the early Earth. They may have been carried to Earth on meteorites (see Murchison meteorite), created at deep-sea vents, or synthesized by lightning in a reducing atmosphere (see Miller–Urey experiment). There is little experimental data defining what the first self-replicating forms were. RNA is thought to be the earliest self-replicating molecule, as it is capable of both storing genetic information and catalyzing chemical reactions (see RNA world hypothesis), but some other entity with the potential to self-replicate could have preceded RNA, such as clay or peptide nucleic acid.\n\nCells emerged at least 3.5 billion years ago. The current belief is that these cells were heterotrophs. The early cell membranes were probably more simple and permeable than modern ones, with only a single fatty acid chain per lipid. Lipids are known to spontaneously form bilayered vesicles in water, and could have preceded RNA, but the first cell membranes could also have been produced by catalytic RNA, or even have required structural proteins before they could form.\n\nThe eukaryotic cell seems to have evolved from a symbiotic community of prokaryotic cells. DNA-bearing organelles like the mitochondria and the chloroplasts are descended from ancient symbiotic oxygen-breathing proteobacteria and cyanobacteria, respectively, which were endosymbiosed by an ancestral archaean prokaryote.\n\nThere is still considerable debate about whether organelles like the hydrogenosome predated the origin of mitochondria, or vice versa: see the hydrogen hypothesis for the origin of eukaryotic cells.\n\n\n\n", "id": "4230", "title": "Cell (biology)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24390945", "text": "Adipogenesis\n\nAdipogenesis is the process of cell differentiation by which pre-adipocytes become adipocytes. Adipogenesis has been one of the most intensively studied models of cellular differentiation.\n\nAdipocytes play a vital role in energy homeostasis and process the largest energy reserve as triglycerol in the body of animals. Adipocytes stay in a dynamic state, they start expanding when the energy intake is higher than the expenditure and undergo mobilization when the energy expenditure exceeds the intake. This process is highly regulated by counter regulatory hormones to which these cells are very sensitive. The hormone insulin promotes expansion whereas the counter hormones epinephrine, glucagon,and \nACTH promote mobilization. Adipogenesis is a tightly regulated cellular differentiation process, in which the preadipocytes are transformed into differentiated adipocyte cells. Comparing with cells from other lineage, the in vitro differentiation of fat cells is authentic and recapitulates most of the characteristic feature of in vivo adipogenesis. The key features of differentiated adipocytes are morphological change, growth arrest, high expression of lipogenic genes and production of hormones like leptin, resistin (in the mouse, not in humans) and TNF-alpha.\n\nThe transition of the fibroblast cells to mature adipocytes is one of the best characterized processes of cellular differentiation. Primary preadipose cells can be isolated from the stromal vascular fraction of adipose tissue; and when treated in cell culture with a combination of adipogenic effectors, they can differentiate into adipocytes. \nAn approach of studying adipose tissue development and regulation of adipose specific gene expression in an in vivo context was developed by Mandrup and co-workers. 3T3-F4424 cells when implanted into an athymic (nude) mice gave rise to fat pads that were similar to endogenous white adipose tissue.\n\nAnother approach, developed by Scherer and his colleagues is the AdipoChaser system. This mouse uses an inducible, adipose specific LacZ transgene, where one can label all the currently existing adipocytes as LacZ positive (blue stained) and evaluate the new (white, unlabelled) adipocytes \"in vivo\".\n\nProducts of endocrine system such as insulin, IGF-1, cAMP, glucocorticoid,and \ntriiodothyronine effectively induce adipogenesis in preadipocytes.\n", "id": "24390945", "title": "Adipogenesis"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4317081", "text": "Axostyle\n\nAn axostyle is a sheet of microtubules found in certain microbial eukaryotes. It arises from the bases of the flagella, sometimes projecting beyond the end of the cell, and is often flexible or contractile, and so may be involved in movement and provides support for the cell. Axostyles originate in association with a flagellar microtubular root and occur in two groups, the oxymonads and parabasalids; they have different structures and are not homologous. Within Trichomonads the axostyle has been theorised to participate in locomotion and cell adhesion, but also karyokinesis during cell division. \n", "id": "4317081", "title": "Axostyle"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12318041", "text": "Akinete\n\nAn akinete is an enveloped, thick-walled, non-motile, dormant cell formed by filamentous, heterocyst-forming cyanobacteria under the order Nostocales and Stigonematales. Akinetes are resistant to cold and desiccation. They also accumulate and store various essential materials, both of which allows the akinete to serve as a survival structure for up to many years. However, akinetes are not resistant to heat. Akinetes usually develop in strings with each cell differentiating after another and this occurs next to heterocysts if they are present. Development usually occurs during stationary phase and is triggered by unfavorable conditions such as insufficient light or nutrients, temperature, and saline levels in the environment. Once conditions become more favorable for growth, the akinete can then germinate back into a vegetative cell. Increased light intensity, nutrient availability, oxygen availability, and changes in salinity are important triggers for germination.\nIn comparison to vegetative cells, akinetes are generally larger. This is associated with the accumulation of nucleic acids which is important for both dormancy and germination of the akinete. Despite being a resting cell, it is still capable of some metabolic activities such as photosynthesis, protein synthesis, and carbon fixation, albeit at significantly lower levels.\n\nAkinete formation also influences the perennial blooms of cyanobacteria.\n", "id": "12318041", "title": "Akinete"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4791660", "text": "DNA laddering\n\nDNA laddering is a feature that can be observed when DNA fragments, resulting from apoptotic DNA fragmentation, are visualized after separation by gel electrophoresis. It was first described in 1980 by Andrew Wyllie at the University of Edinburgh Medical School. DNA fragments can also be detected in cells that underwent necrosis, but when these DNA fragments after separation are subjected to gel electrophoresis no clear \"ladder\" pattern is apparent.\n\nDNA laddering is a distinctive feature of DNA degraded by caspase-activated DNase (CAD), which is a key event during apoptosis. CAD cleaves genomic DNA at internucleosomal linker regions, resulting in DNA fragments that are multiples of 180–185 base-pairs in length. Separation of the fragments by agarose gel electrophoresis and subsequent visualization, for example by ethidium bromide staining, results in a characteristic \"ladder\" pattern. A simple method of selective extraction of fragmented DNA from apoptotic cells without the presence of high molecular weight DNA sections, generating the laddering pattern, utilizes pretreatment of cells in ethanol.\n\nWhile most of the morphological features of apoptotic cells are short-lived, DNA laddering can be used as final state read-out method and has therefore become a reliable method to distinguish apoptosis from necrosis. DNA laddering can also be used to see if cells underwent apoptosis in the presence of a virus. This is useful because it can help determine the effects a virus has on a cell.\n\nDNA laddering can only be used to detect apoptosis during the later stages of apoptosis. This is due to DNA fragmentation taking place in a later stage of the apoptosis process. DNA laddering is used to test for apoptosis of many cells, and is not accurate at testing for only a few cells that committed apoptosis. To enhance the accuracy in testing for apoptosis, other assays are used along with DNA laddering such as TEM and TUNEL. With recent improvements to DNA laddering, DNA laddering has become a more reliable, and reasonable technique to use when detecting apoptosis. It is also important to note that DNA laddering occurs differently depending on the type of cell, so there may be slight changes in the process of DNA laddering depending on the cell that is being investigated.\n\n", "id": "4791660", "title": "DNA laddering"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28325705", "text": "Ischemic cell death\n\n\"Ischemic cell death\", or \"Oncosis\", is a form of accidental cell death. The process is characterized by an ATP depletion within the cell leading to impairment of ionic pumps, cell swelling, clearing of the cytosol, dilation of the Endoplasmic Reticulum and Golgi, mitochondrial condensation, chromatin clumping, and cytoplasmic bleb formation. Oncosis refers to a series of cellular reactions following injury that precedes cell death. The process of oncosis is divided into three stages. First, the cell becomes committed to oncosis as a result of damage incurred to the plasma membrane through toxicity or ischemia, resulting in the leak of ions and water due to ATP depletion. The ionic imbalance that occurs subsequently causes the cell to swell without a concurrent change in membrane permeability to reverse the swelling. Stage two the reversibility threshold for the cell is passed and it becomes committed to cell death. During this stage the membrane becomes abnormally permeable to trypan blue and propidium iodide, indicating membrane compromise. The final stage is cell death and removal of the cell via phagocytosis mediated by an inflammatory response.\n\nAlthough \"ischemic cell death\" is the accepted name of the process, the alternative name of \"oncosis\" was introduced as the process involves the affected cell(s) swelling to an abnormally large size in known models. This is thought to be caused by failure of the plasma membrane's ionic pumps. The name \"oncosis\" (derived from \"ónkos\", meaning largeness, and \"ónkosis\", meaning swelling) was first introduced in 1910 by pathologist Friedrich Daniel von Recklinghausen.\n\nOncosis and apoptosis are distinct processes of cellular death. Oncosis is characterized by cellular swelling caused by a failure in ion pump function. Apoptosis, or programmed cell death involves a series of cell shrinking processes, beginning with cell size reduction and pyknosis, followed by cell budding and karyorrhexis, and phagocytosis by macrophages or neighboring cells due to size decrease. The phagocytic disposal of apoptotic cells prevents the release of cellular debris that could induce an inflammatory response in neighboring cells. In opposition, the leakage of cellular content associated with membrane disruption in oncosis often incites an inflammatory response in neighboring tissue, causing further cellular injury. Additionally, apoptosis and the degradation of intracellular organelles is mediated by caspase activation, particularly caspase-3. Oligonuclosomal DNA fragmentation is initiated by caspase-activated deoxyribonuclease following caspase-3 mediated cleavage of the enzyme’s inhibitor, ICAD. In contrast, the oncotic pathway has been shown to be caspase-3 independent.\n\nThe primary determinant of cell death occurring via the oncotic or apoptotic pathway is cellular ATP levels. Apoptosis is contingent upon ATP levels to form the energy dependent apoptosome. A distinct biochemical event only seen in oncosis is the rapid depletion of intracellular ATP. The lack of intracellular ATP results in a deactivation of sodium and potassium ATPase within the compromised cell membrane. The lack of ion transport at the cell membrane leads to an accumulation of sodium and chloride ions within the cell with a concurrent water influx, contributing to the hallmark cellular swelling of oncosis. As with apoptosis, oncosis has been shown to be genetically programmed and dependent on expression levels of uncoupling protein-2 (UCP-2) in HeLa cells. An increase in UCP-2 levels leads to a rapid decrease in mitochondrial membrane potential, reducing mitochondrial NADH and intracellular ATP levels, initiating the oncotic pathway. The anti-apoptotic gene product Bcl-2 is not an active inhibitor of UCP-2 initiated cell death, further distinguishing oncosis and apoptosis as distinct cellular death mechanisms.\n", "id": "28325705", "title": "Ischemic cell death"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28346382", "text": "Organelle biogenesis\n\nOrganelle biogenesis is the biogenesis, or creation, of cellular organelles in cells. Organelle biogenesis includes the process by which cellular organelles are split between daughter cells during mitosis; this process is called organelle inheritance.\n\nFollowing the discovery of cellular organelles in the nineteenth century, little was known about their function and synthesis until the development of electron microscopy and subcellular fractionation in the twentieth century. This allowed experiments on the function, structure, and biogenesis of these organelles to commence.\n\nMechanisms of protein sorting and retrieval have been found to give organelles their characteristic composition. It is known that cellular organelles can come from preexisting organelles; however, it is a subject of controversy whether organelles can be created without a preexisting one.\n\nSeveral processes are known to have developed for organelle biogenesis. These can range from \"de novo\" synthesis to the copying of a template organelle; the formation of an organelle 'from scratch' and using a preexisting organelle as a template to manufacture an organelle, respectively. The distinct structures of each organelle are thought to be caused by the different mechanisms of the processes which create them and the proteins that they are made up of. Organelles may also be 'split' between two cells during the process of cellular division (known as organelle inheritance), where the organelle of the parent cell doubles in size and then splits with each half being delivered to their respective daughter cells.\n\nThe process of organelle biogenesis is known to be regulated by specialized transcription networks that modulate the expression of the genes that code for specific organellar proteins. In order for organelle biogenesis to be carried out properly, the specific genes coding for the organellar proteins must be transcribed properly and the translation of the resulting mRNA must be successful. In addition to this, the process requires the transfer of polypeptides to their site of function, guided by signaling peptides. If proteins are not directed to their respective sites of subcellular function, a defective organelle that fails to fulfill its tasks within the cell properly may result.\n\nSeveral metabolic diseases are known to be caused by a fault in the process of organelle biogenesis. These may include mitochondrial biogenesis defects, peroxisome biogenesis disorders, and lysosomal storage disorders.\n", "id": "28346382", "title": "Organelle biogenesis"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22269179", "text": "Aster (cell biology)\n\nAn aster is a cellular structure shaped like a star, formed around each centrosome during mitosis in an animal cell. Astral rays, composed of microtubules, radiate from the centrosphere and look like a cloud. It is one of the variants of microtubules like kinetochore and interpolar microtubules.\n\nDuring mitosis, there are four stages of cell division: Prophase, Metaphase, Anaphase, and Telophase. During prophase, two aster-covered centrosomes migrate to opposite sides of the nucleus in preparation of mitotic spindle formation. During metaphase, the kinetochore microtubules connect to the centromere. Afterwards, during anaphase, the kinetochore microtubules pull the chromatids apart into its individual chromosomes and pull them towards the centrosomes, located at opposite ends of the cell. This allows the cell to divide properly with each daughter cell containing full replicas of chromosomes. In some cells, the positions of the asters determine the site of cell divisions.\n\n", "id": "22269179", "title": "Aster (cell biology)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24884394", "text": "Auxesis (biology)\n\nAuxesis (from the Greek word meaning increase; grow) refers to growth from an increase in cell size rather than an increase in the number of cells. Auxetic growth occurs in certain tissues, such as muscle, of the higher animals as well as in some organisms, such as nematodes, tunicates, and rotifers. \n\nIn plant physiology, an auxetic substance will tend to increase cell growth without any cell division. Auxins are auxetic plant hormones.\n\n", "id": "24884394", "title": "Auxesis (biology)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2936115", "text": "Chief cell\n\nIn human anatomy, there are three types of chief cells, the gastric chief cell, the parathyroid chief cell, and the type 1 chief cells found in the carotid body.\n\nThe gastric chief cell (also known as a zymogenic cell or peptic cell) is a cell in the stomach that releases pepsinogen and chymosin. Pepsinogen is activated into the digestive enzyme pepsin when it comes in contact with acid produced by gastric parietal cells. This type of cell also secretes gastric lipase enzymes, which help digest triglycerides into free fatty acids and di- and mono-glycerides. There is also evidence that the gastric chief cell secretes leptin in response to the presence of food in the stomach. Leptin has been found in the pepsinogen granules of chief cells.\n\nGastric pit cells are replaced every 2–4 days. This high rate of turnover is a protective mechanism designed to protect the epithelial lining of the stomach from both the proteolytic action of pepsin and the acid produced by parietal cells. Gastric chief cells are much longer lived and are believed to differentiate from stem cells located higher in the gastric unit in the isthmus. These stem cells differentiate into mucous neck cells in the isthmus and transition into chief cells as they migrate towards the base. Since the mucus neck cells do not divide as it becomes a chief cell this process is known as transdifferentiation. The gene Mist1 has been shown to regulate mucus neck cell to chief cell transdifferentiation and plays a role in the normal development of the chief cell organelles and structures.\n\nThe parathyroid chief cell is the primary cell of the parathyroid gland. It produces and secretes parathyroid hormone in response to low calcium levels. PTH plays an important role in regulating blood calcium levels by raising the amount of calcium in the blood. Parathyroid tissue seems to have a low turn-over rate.\n\nGastric chief cells are epithelial cells which are found within the gastric unit or gastric gland, and form the base of the gastric unit. The gastric chief cell has an extensive network of lamellar rough endoplasmic reticulum organized around the nucleus. The gastric chief cell also contains many large secretory vesicles filled with digestive enzymes in the apical cytoplasm.\n\nParathyroid chief cells make up the majority of the parathyroid gland along with adipocytes and oxyphil cells. Parathyroid chief cells have large amounts of organelles associated with protein synthesis. As in many endocrine organs, with age, more oxyphil cells appear in the parathyroid gland.\n\nIn gastric tissue, a loss of parietal cells due to chronic inflammation has been shown to affect chief cell differentiation and can induce chief cells to transdifferentiate back into neck cells and can lead to the formation of mucus cell metaplasia known as spasmolytic polypeptide expressing metaplasia (SPEM) that could be precancerous. If parietal cells are lost, mature chief cells do not form. Parietal cells may secrete factors that lead to transdifferentiation of chief cells, so if lost, chief cells do not normally develop.\n", "id": "2936115", "title": "Chief cell"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19259552", "text": "Foreign-body giant cell\n\nA foreign-body giant cell is a collection of fused macrophages (giant cell) which are generated in response to the presence of a large foreign body. This is particularly evident with implants that cause the body chronic inflammation and foreign body response. \nThis reaction to the implant causes damages to the infected area, leaving the exterior surface with scars.\n\nThe nuclei are arranged in a disorganized manner. The nuclei in this cell are centrally placed and overlap each other. This is in contrast to a Langhans giant cell, where the nuclei are arranged on the border.\n\nForeign body cells can detect and eliminate\nbacteria caught within the body, by sensing the unique sugar coating that are\non the invading prokaryotes. These macrophage cells are one of a few\nphagocytic cells, but not the first to come to an injury site, and tend to\nlinger from anytime between days to weeks. There has been some research done on other variations of\ngiant calls with different functions.\n\nSmall image of an infected area of the body due to a reaction with an implant\n", "id": "19259552", "title": "Foreign-body giant cell"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6853552", "text": "Langhans giant cell\n\nLanghans giant cells (also known as Pirogov-Langhans cells) are large cells found in granulomatous conditions.\n\nThey are formed by the fusion of epithelioid cells (macrophages), and contain nuclei arranged in a horseshoe-shaped pattern in the cell periphery.\n\nAlthough traditionally their presence was associated with tuberculosis, they are not specific for tuberculosis or even for mycobacterial disease. In fact, they are found in nearly every form of granulomatous disease, regardless of etiology.\n\nLanghans giant cells are named after Theodor Langhans (1839–1915), a German pathologist.\n\nThey should not be confused with Langerhans cells, which are mononuclear epidermal dendritic cells derived (like Langhans cells) from monocytes and named after Paul Langerhans. (The Islets of Langerhans are also named after Paul Langerhans.)\n\nRecently, a research paper has shown that when activated CD4+ T cells and monocytes are in close contact, interaction of CD40-CD40L between these two cells and subsequent IFNγ secretion by the T cells causes upregulation and secretion of fusion-related molecule DC-STAMP (dendritic cell-specific transmembrane protein) by the monocytes, which results in LGC formation.\n\nLanghans cells are often found in transbronchial lung biopsies or lymph node biopsies in patients suffering from sarcoidosis.\n\n", "id": "6853552", "title": "Langhans giant cell"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23536766", "text": "Touton giant cell\n\nTouton giant cells are a type of multinucleated giant cell seen in lesions with high lipid content such as fat necrosis, xanthoma, and xanthogranulomas. They are also found in dermatofibroma.\n\nTouton giant cells are named for Karl Touton, a German botanist and dermatologist. Karl Touton first observed these cells in 1885 and named them \"xanthelasmatic giant cells\", a name which has since fallen out of favor.\n\nTouton giant cells, being multinucleated giant cells, can be distinguished by the presence of several nuclei in a distinct pattern. They contain a ring of nuclei surrounding a central homogeneous cytoplasm, while foamy cytoplasm surrounds the nuclei. The cytoplasm surrounded by the nuclei has been described as both amphophilic and eosinophilic, while the cytoplasm near the periphery of the cell is pale and foamy in appearance.\n\nTouton giant cells are formed by the fusion of macrophage-derived foam cells. It has been suggested that cytokines such as interferon gamma, interleukin-3, and M-CSF may be involved in the production of Touton giant cells.\n\n", "id": "23536766", "title": "Touton giant cell"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3071326", "text": "Giant cell\n\nA giant cell (multinucleated giant cell, multinucleate giant cell) is a mass formed by the union of several distinct cells (usually macrophages), often forming a granuloma. It can arise in response to an infection, such as from tuberculosis, herpes, or HIV, or foreign body. These multinucleate giant cells (MGCs) are cells of monocyte or macrophage lineage fused together.\n\nTypes include:\n\nAlso\n\nMultinucleated giant cell formations can arise from numerous types of bacteria, diseases, and cell formations. Giant cells are known to develop when infections are also present. They were first noticed as early as the middle of the last century, but still it is not fully understood why these reactions occur. In the process of giant cell formation, monocytes or macrophages fuse together, which could cause multiple problems for the immune system.\n\nThe most common form of giant cell formations is giant-cell arteritis, it is also known as temporal arteritis or cranial arteritis. This type of arteritis causes the arteries in the head, neck, and arm area to swell to abnormal sizes. Although this disease has no apparent causes it seems to be related to polymyalgia rheumatica.\n\nThis disease is mostly known to affect older individuals that are in their fifties and sixties. Women are three times more likely to develop the disease than men are and Caucasians are seven times more likely to develop the disease than Africans.\n\nSymptoms may include: Mild fever, Loss of appetite, Fatigue, Vision loss, Severe headache.\n\nSymptoms are very similar to the flu virus and is often mistaken to be the flu virus. In the worst-case scenario, if left untreated, this disease can result in permanent blindness.\n\nThe gold standard for diagnosis is a temporal artery biopsy. Before the biopsy to take place the skin in your face will need to be anesthetised for the incision. After numbing, an incision will be made in the face around the area of the temples to get a sample of the temporal artery. The incision will then be sutured.\n\nA histopathologist will then examine the sample under a microscope, who will then issue a pathology report (pending extra tests that may be requested by the pathologist).\n\nThe management regime consists primarily of systemic corticosteroids (e.g. prednisolone), commencing at a high dose.\n\nThis particular form of giant cell was named after a German pathologist, Theodor Langhans. Like many of the other kinds of giant cell formations, the epithelioid macrophages fuse together, and in return multiple nuclei form. This formation is often referred to as multinucleated giant cells in which the nuclei form a circle or semicircle related to the shape of a horseshoe away from the center of the cell. Langhans giant cell is said to be related to tuberculosis and it occurs in many types of granulomatous diseases.\n\nIt is more common to get the disease if the person is infected with tuberculosis in endemic areas or develop sarcoidosis.\n\nLanghans giant cell could be closely related to tuberculosis, syphilis, sarcoidosis and deep fungal infections. Langhans giant cell occurs frequently in delayed hypersensitivity.\n\nSymptoms may include\n\nThis type of giant cell could be caused by bacteria that spread from person to person through the air. Tuberculosis is related to HIV; many people who have HIV also have a hard time fighting off diseases and sicknesses. Many tests may be performed to treat other related diseases to obtain the correct diagnosis for Langhans giant cell.\n\nThis type of giant cell also is sometimes called a xanthelasmatic giant cell. Touton giant cells also consist of fused epithelioid macrophages and have multiple nuclei. The nuclei form a ring and are surrounded by foamy cytoplasm, one symptom of this particular giant cell is a foamy cytoplasm making the cytoplasm visible around the nucleus. This giant cell formation has been seen in lipid-laden or more known fat necrosis.\n\nThe formation of Touton giant cell is most common in men and women age 37 – 78.\n\nLike all other forms of giant cells Touton giant cell has pretty much the same symptoms as any of the other form of giant cells. Which include:\n\nAs the name implies, foreign-body giant cells form when a subject is exposed to a foreign substance. Exogenous substances include talc or sutures. As with other types of giant cells, epithelioid macrophages fusing together causes these giant cells to form and grow. In this form of giant cell, the nuclei are arranged in an overlapping manner. This giant cell is often found in tissue because of medical devices, prostheses, and biomaterials.\n\nEndogenous substances such as keratin, fat, and cholesterol crystals (cholesteatoma) can induce mast cell formation.\n\n\n", "id": "3071326", "title": "Giant cell"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17387004", "text": "Globules of fat\n\nIn human cell biology globules of fat are the individual pieces of intracellular fat inside other cell types than adipocytes (fat cells). Intracellular fat is bound in the globular form by phospholipid membranes, which are hydrophobic. This means that fat globules are insoluble in water.\n\nIn simpler terms: a vacuole or droplet of triglyceride or some other blood lipid, which is located inside a cell that is not an adipocyte (fat cell), as opposed to fat cells in between other cells in an organ. Lipids and any lipid digestive derivatives must be transported in the globular form within the cell, blood and tissue spaces due to its insolubility.\n\nGlobules of fat are emulsified in the stomach into small droplets by bile salts during food digestion, speeding up the rate of digestion by the enzyme lipase later on. Bile salts possess detergent properties that allow them to emulsify fat globules into smaller emulsion droplets, and then into even smaller micelles. This increases the surface area for lipid-hydrolyzing enzymes to act on the fats.\n\nMicelles are roughly 200 times smaller than emulsion droplets, allowing them to facilitate transport monoglycerides and fatty acids across the surface of the enterocyte, where absorption occurs.\n\nMilk fat is another form of intracellular fat found in the mammary glands of female mammals. In this form, fat globules or droplets are formed through the synthesis of phosphatidylcholine to regulate globule formation.\n\n", "id": "17387004", "title": "Globules of fat"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17793469", "text": "Calcium pump\n\nCalcium pumps are a family of ion transporters found in the cell membrane of all animal cells. They are responsible for the active transport of calcium out of the cell for the maintenance of the steep Ca electrochemical gradient across the cell membrane. Calcium pumps play a crucial role in proper cell signalling by keeping the intracellular calcium concentration roughly 10,000 times lower than the extracellular concentration. Failure to do so is one cause of muscle cramps.\n\nThe plasma membrane Ca ATPase and the sodium-calcium exchanger are together the main regulators of intracellular Ca concentrations.\n\nCa has many important roles as an intracellular messenger. The release of a large amount of free Ca can trigger a fertilized egg to develop, skeletal muscle cells to contract, secretion by secretory cells and interactions with Ca -responsive proteins like calmodulin. To maintain low concentrations of free Ca in the cytosol, cells use membrane pumps like calcium ATPase found in the membranes of sarcoplasmic reticulum of skeletal muscle. These pumps are needed to provide the steep electrochemical gradient that allows Ca to rush into the cytosol when a stimulus signal opens the Ca channels in the membrane. The pumps are also necessary to actively pump the Ca back out of the cytoplasm and return the cell to its pre-signal state.\n\nThe structure of calcium pumps found in the sarcoplasmic reticulum of skeletal muscle was elucidated in 2000 by Toyoshima, et al. using microscopy of tubular crystals and 3D microcrystals. The pump has a molecular mass of 110,000 amu, shows three well separated cytoplasmic domains, with a transmembrane domain consisting of ten alpha helices and two transmembrane Ca binding sites.\n\nClassical theory of active transport for P-type ATPases\nData from crystallography studies by Chikashi Toyoshima applied to the above cycle \n", "id": "17793469", "title": "Calcium pump"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13141227", "text": "Homokaryotic\n\nHomokaryotic (adj.) is a term used to refer to multinucleate cells where all nuclei are genetically identical. In multinucleate cells, nuclei share one common cytoplasm, as is found in hyphal cells or mycelium of filamentous fungi. Homokaryotic is the antonym of heterokaryotic.\n\n", "id": "13141227", "title": "Homokaryotic"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5386941", "text": "Osmotic shock\n\nOsmotic shock or osmotic stress is physiologic dysfunction caused by a sudden change in the solute concentration around a cell, which causes a rapid change in the movement of water across its cell membrane. Under conditions of high concentrations of either salts, substrates or any solute in the supernatant, water is drawn out of the cells through osmosis. This also inhibits the transport of substrates and cofactors into the cell thus “shocking” the cell. Alternatively, at low concentrations of solutes, water enters the cell in large amounts, causing it to swell and either burst or undergo apoptosis.\n\nAll organisms have mechanisms to respond to osmotic shock, with sensors and signal transduction networks providing information to the cell about the osmolarity of its surroundings; these signals activate responses to deal with extreme conditions. Although single-celled organisms are more vulnerable to osmotic shock, since they are directly exposed to their environment, cells in large animals such as mammals still suffer these stresses under some conditions. Current research also suggests that osmotic stress in cells and tissues may significantly contribute to many human diseases.\n\nIn eukaryotes, calcium acts as one of the primary regulators of osmotic stress. Intracellular calcium levels rise during hypo-osmotic and hyper-osmotic stresses. During hyper-osmotic stress extracellular albumin binds calcium.\n\nextracellular sequestering of Calcium by blood Albumin.\n\nTransient intracellular Ca increase.\n\nintracellular Ca increase and Extracellular ATP Release\n\nCalcium dependent efflux of the osmolyte Taurine. Extracellular calcium removal was found to prevent Taurine efflux by 50%, and removal of extracellular Ca and simultaneous depletion of intracellular Ca stores with thapsigargin decreased it by 85%.\n\n", "id": "5386941", "title": "Osmotic shock"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=793343", "text": "Mesangial cell\n\nMesangial cells are specialised cells in the kidney that make up the mesangium of the glomerulus. Together with the mesangial matrix, they form the vascular pole of the renal corpuscle. The mesangial cell population accounts for approximately 30-40% of the total cells in the glomerulus. Mesangial cells can be categorised as either extraglomerular mesangial cells or intraglomerular mesangial cells, based on their relative location to the glomerulus. The extraglomerular mesangial cells are found between the afferent and efferent arterioles towards the vascular pole of the glomerulus. The extraglomerular mesangial cells are adjacent to the intraglomerular mesangial cells that are located inside the glomerulus and in between the capillaries. The primary function of mesangial cells is to remove trapped residues and aggregated protein from the basement membrane thus keeping the filter free of debris. The contractile properties of mesangial cells have been shown to be insignificant in changing the filtration pressure of the glomerulus. \n\nMesangial cells have irregular shapes with flattened-cylinder-like cell bodies and processes at both ends containing actin, myosin and actinin, giving mesangial cells contractile properties. The anchoring filaments from mesangial cells to the glomerular basement membrane can alter capillary flow by changing glomerular ultrafiltration surface area. Extraglomerular mesangial cells are in close connection to afferent and efferent arteriolar cells by gap junctions, allowing for intercellular communication. Mesangial cells are separated by intercellular spaces containing extracellular matrix called the mesangial matrix that is produced by the mesangial cells. Mesangial matrix provides structural support for the mesangium. Mesangial matrix is composed of glomerular matrix proteins such as collagen IV (α1 and α2 chains), collagen V, collagen VI, lamininA, B1, B2, fibronectin, and proteoglycans.\n\nIt is unclear whether the mesangial cells originate from mesenchymal or stromal cells. However there is evidence suggesting that they originate elsewhere outside of the glomerulus and then migrate into the glomerulus during development. Human foetal and infant kidneys stained for alpha smooth muscle actin (α-SMA), a marker for mesangial cells, demonstrated that α-SMA-positive mesenchymal cells migrate towards the glomerulus and during a later stage they can be found within the mesangium. It is possible that they share the same origin as supporting cells such as pericytes and vascular smooth muscle cells, or even be a type of specialised vascular smooth muscle cell.\n\nDuring development mesangial cells are important in the formation of convoluted capillaries allowing for efficient diffusion to occur. Endothelial precursor cells secrete platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-B and mesangial cells have receptors for PDGF. This induces mesangial cells to attach to endothelial cells causing developing blood vessels to loop resulting in convoluted capillaries. Mice lacking the growth factor PDGF-B or PDGFRβ do not develop mesangial cells. When mesangial cells are absent the blood vessel becomes a single dilated vessel with up to 100-fold decrease in surface area. The transcription factor for PDGFRβ, Tbx18, is crucial for the development of mesangial cells. Without Tbx18 the development of mesangial cells is compromised and results in the formation of dilated loops. Mesangial cell progenitors are also a target of PDGF-B and can be selected for by the signal to then develop into mesangial cells.\n\nMesangial cells form a glomerular functional unit with glomerular endothelial cells and podocytes through interactions of molecular signalling pathways which are essential for the formation of the glomerular tuft. Mesangial cells aid filtration by constituting part of the glomerular capillary tuft structure that filters fluids to produce urine. Communication between mesangial cells and vascular smooth muscle cells via gap junctions helps regulate the process of tubuloglomerular feedback and urine formation. Damage to mesangial cells using Thy 1-1 antibody specific to mesangial cells causes the vasoconstriction of arterioles mediated by tubuloglomerular feedback to be lost.\n\nMesangial cells can contract and relax to regulate capillary flow. This is regulated by vasoactive substances. Contraction of mesangial cells is dependent on cell membrane permeability to calcium ions and relaxation is mediated by paracrine factors, hormones and cAMP. In response to capillary stretching, mesangial cells can respond by producing several growth factors: TGF-1, VEGF and connective tissue growth factor.\n\nThe mesangium is exposed to macromolecules from the capillary lumen as they are separated only by fenestrated endothelium without basement membrane. Mesangial cells play a role in restricting macromolecules from accumulating in the mesangial space by receptor- independent uptake processes of phagocytosis, micro- and macro-pinocytosis, or receptor-dependent processes and then transported along the mesangial stalk. Size, charge, concentration, and affinity for mesangial cell receptors of the macromolecule affects how the macromolecule is removed. Triglycerides may undergo pinocytosis and antibody IgG complexes may lead to activation of adhesion molecules and chemokines by mesangial cells.\n\nThe expansion of mesangial matrix is one characteristic of diabetic nephropathy although it also involves other cells in interaction including podocytes and endothelial cells. Mesangial expansion occurs due to increased deposition of extracellular matrix proteins, for example fibronectin, into the mesangium. Accumulation of extracellular matrix proteins then occurs due to insufficient degradation by matrix metalloproteinases.\n\nIncreased glucose levels results in the activation of metabolic pathways leading to increased oxidative stress. This in turn results in the over-production and accumulation of advanced glycosylation end products responsible for enhancing the risk of developing glomerular diseases. Mesangial cells grown on advanced glycosylation end product-modified matrix proteins demonstrate increased production of fibronectin and a decrease in proliferation. These factors eventually lead to the thickening of the glomerular basement membrane, mesangial matrix expansion then glomerulosclerosis and fibrosis.\n\nMesangial pathologies may also develop during the early phase of diabetes. Glomerular hypertension causes mesangial cells to stretch which causes induced expression of GLUT1 leading to increased cellular glucose. The repetition of stretching and relaxation cycle of mesangial cells due to hypertension increases mesangial cell proliferation and the production of extracellular matrix which can then accumulate and lead to glomerular disease.\n", "id": "793343", "title": "Mesangial cell"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10071222", "text": "Phosphorylation cascade\n\nA phosphorylation cascade is a sequence of events where one enzyme phosphorylates another, causing a chain reaction leading to the phosphorylation of thousands of proteins.\n\nThis can be seen in signal transduction of hormone messages.\n", "id": "10071222", "title": "Phosphorylation cascade"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4514247", "text": "Ham's tissue culture medium\n\nHam's tissue culture medium is a growth medium for mammalian cells.\n\nIt contains in amounts dissolved in 1 liter of triple distilled water:\n\n\n", "id": "4514247", "title": "Ham's tissue culture medium"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9833531", "text": "XCR1\n\nThe \"C\" sub-family of chemokine receptors contains only one member: XCR1, the receptor for XCL1 and XCL2 (or lymphotactin-1 and -2).\n\nXCR1 is also known as GPR5.\n", "id": "9833531", "title": "XCR1"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14269750", "text": "Intermicrovillous space\n\nThe Intermicrovillous space is the space between microvilli at a cell's surface. Intermicrovillous space is increases with contractile activity of myosin II and tropomyosin, and decreases when contraction ceases.\n", "id": "14269750", "title": "Intermicrovillous space"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3359456", "text": "Incubator (culture)\n\nIn biology, an incubator is a device used to grow and maintain microbiological cultures or cell cultures. The incubator maintains optimal temperature, humidity and other conditions such as the carbon dioxide (CO) and oxygen content of the atmosphere inside. Incubators are essential for a lot of experimental work in cell biology, microbiology and molecular biology and are used to culture both bacterial as well as eukaryotic cells.\n\nLouis Pasteur used the small opening underneath his staircase as an incubator. Incubators are also used in the poultry industry to act as a substitute for hens. This often results in higher hatch rates due to the ability to control both temperature and humidity. Various brands of incubators are commercially available to breeders.\n\nThe simplest incubators are insulated boxes with an adjustable heater, typically going up to 60 to 65 °C (140 to 150 °F), though some can go slightly higher (generally to no more than 100 °C). The most commonly used temperature both for bacteria such as the frequently used E. coli as well as for mammalian cells is approximately 37 °C (99 °F), as these organisms grow well under such conditions. For other organisms used in biological experiments, such as the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, a growth temperature of 30 °C (86 °F) is optimal. \n\nMore elaborate incubators can also include the ability to lower the temperature (via refrigeration), or the ability to control humidity or CO levels. This is important in the cultivation of mammalian cells, where the relative humidity is typically >80% to prevent evaporation and a slightly acidic pH is achieved by maintaining a CO level of 5%.\n\nPerhaps one of the most important pieces of equipment in the laboratory, the incubator has provided a foundation for countless medical advances and experimental work in cellular and molecular biology. From aiding in hatching chicken eggs to enabling scientists to understand and develop vaccines for deadly viruses, the laboratory incubator has seen numerous applications over the thousands of years it has been in use.\n\nAn incubator is made up of a chamber with a regulated temperature. Some incubators also regulate humidity, gas composition, or ventilation within that chamber. While many technological advances have occurred since the primitive incubators used in ancient Egypt and China, the main purpose of the incubator has remained unchanged: to create a stable, controlled environment conducive to research, study, and cultivation.\n\nThe earliest incubators were found thousands of years ago in ancient Egypt and China, where they were used to keep chicken eggs warm. Use of incubators revolutionized food production, as it allowed chicks to hatch from eggs without requiring that a hen sit on them, thus freeing the hens to lay more eggs in a shorter period of time. Both early Egyptian and Chinese incubators were essentially large rooms that were heated by fires, where attendants turned the eggs at regular intervals to ensure even heat distribution.\n\nThe incubator received an update in the 16th century when Jean Baptiste Porta drew on ancient Egyptian design to create a more modern egg incubator. While he eventually had to discontinue his work due to the Spanish Inquisition, Rene-Antoine Ferchault de Reaumur took up the challenge in the middle of the 17th century. Reaumur warmed his incubator with a wood stove and monitored its temperature using the Reaumur thermometer, another of his inventions.\n\nIn the 19th century, researchers finally began to recognize that the use of incubators could contribute to medical advancements. They began to experiment to find the ideal environment for maintaining cell culture stocks. These early incubators were simply made up of bell jars that contained a single lit candle. Cultures were placed near the flame on the underside of the jar's lid, and the entire jar was placed in a dry, heated oven.\n\nIn the late 19th century, doctors realized another practical use for incubators: keeping premature or weak infants alive. The first infant incubator, used at a women's hospital in Paris, was heated by kerosene lamps. Fifty years later, Julius H. Hess, an American physician often considered to be the father of neonatology, designed an electric infant incubator that closely resembles the infant incubators in use today.\n\nThe next innovation in incubator technology came in the 1960s, when the CO2 incubator was introduced to the market. Demand came when doctors realized that they could use CO2 incubators to identify and study pathogens found in patients' bodily fluids. To do this, a sample was harvested and placed onto a sterile dish and into the incubator. The air in the incubator was kept at 37 degrees Celsius, the same temperature as the human body, and the incubator maintained the atmospheric carbon dioxide and nitrogen levels necessary to promote cell growth.\n\nAt this time, incubators also began to be used in genetic engineering. Scientists could create biologically essential proteins, such as insulin, with the use of incubators. Genetic modification could now take place on a molecular level, helping to improve the nutritional content and resistance to pestilence and disease of fruits and vegetables.\n\nIn 1984, SHEL LAB introduced a general-purpose incubator. The incubator had the ability to provide superior temperature uniformity with a warm air-jacket design.\n\nThe EchoTherm incubator came to market in the 1990s. It was in demand for its compact design and its ability to chill as well as heat.\n\nIncubators serve a variety of functions in a scientific lab. Incubators generally maintain a constant temperature, however additional features are often built in. Many incubators also control humidity. Shaking incubators incorporate movement to mix cultures. Gas incubators regulate the internal gas composition. Some incubators have a means of circulating the air inside of them to ensure even distribution of temperatures. Many incubators built for laboratory use have a redundant power source, to ensure that power outages do not disrupt experiments. Incubators are made in a variety of sizes, from tabletop models, to warm rooms, which serve as incubators for large numbers of samples.\n\n", "id": "3359456", "title": "Incubator (culture)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10970590", "text": "GemIdent\n\nGemIdent is an interactive image recognition program that identifies regions of interest in images and photographs. It is specifically designed for images with few colors, where the objects of interest look alike with small variation. For example, color image segmentation of: \n\nGemIdent also packages data analysis tools to investigate spatial relationships among the objects identified.\n\nGemIdent was developed at Stanford University by Adam Kapelner from June, 2006 until January, 2007 in the lab of Dr. Peter Lee under the tutelage of Professor Susan Holmes. The concept was inspired by data Kohrt et al. who analyzed immune profiles of lymph nodes in breast cancer patients. Hence, GemIdent works well when identifying cells in IHC-stained tissue imaged via automated light microscopy when the nuclear background stain and membrane/cytoplasmic stain are well-defined. In 2008, it was adapted to support multispectral imaging techniques.\n\nGemIdent uses supervised learning to perform automated\nidentification of regions of interest in the images. Therefore, the user must do a substantial amount of work first supplying the relevant colors, then pointing out examples of the objects or regions themselves as well as negatives (training set creation).\n\nWhen a user clicks on a pixel, many scores are generated using the surrounding color information via \"Mahalanobis Ring Score\" attribute generation (read the JSS paper for a detailed exposition). These scores are then used to build a random forest machine-learning classifier which will then classify pixels in any given image.\n\nAfter classification, there may be mistakes. The user can return to training and point out the specific mistakes and then reclassify. These training-classifying-retraining-reclassifying iterations (considered interactive boosting) can result in a highly accurate segmentation.\n\nIn 2010, Setiadi et al. analyzed histological sections of lymph nodes looking at spatial densities of B and T cells. \"Cell numbers do not capture the full range of information encoded within tissues\".\n\nThe Java source code is now open source under GPL2.\n\nThe raw photograph (left), a superimposed mask showing the pixel classification results (center), and finally the photograph is marked with the centroids of the object of interest - the oranges (right)\nThe raw microscopic image of a stained lymph node (left) from the Kohrt study, a superimposed mask showing the pixel classification results (center), and finally the image is marked with the centroids of the object of interest - the cancer nuclei (right)\nThis example illustrates GemIdent's ability to find multiple phenotypes in the same image: the raw microscopic image of a stained lymph node (top left) from the Kohrt study, a superimposed mask showing the pixel classification results (top right), and finally the image marked with the centroids of the objects of interest - the cancer nuclei (in green stars), the T-cells (in yellow stars), and non-specific background nuclei (in cyan stars).\nThe command-line data analysis and visualization interface in action analyzing results of a classification of a lymph node from the Kohrt study. The histogram displays the distribution of distances from T-cells to neighboring cancer cells. The binary image of cancer membrane is the result of a pixel-only classification. The open PDF document is the autogenerated report of the analysis which includes a thumbnail view of the entire lymph node, counts and Type I error rates for all phenotypes, as well as a transcript of the analyses performed.\n", "id": "10970590", "title": "GemIdent"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4154597", "text": "Endogenous mediator\n\nEndogenous mediators are intracellular proteins that enhance and activate the functions of other proteins. This term is commonly used in molecular biology, cell biology and in pharmacology preed to describe a specific protein complex that acts in transcription as a coactivator. This Mediator complex is located within the cell nucleus. \n\nThe Mediator complex is required for the successful transcription of nearly all class II gene promoters in yeast. It works in the same manner in mammals. The mediator functions as a coactivator and binds to the C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II holoenzyme, acting as a bridge between this enzyme and transcription factors.\n", "id": "4154597", "title": "Endogenous mediator"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29189131", "text": "Tyzzeria\n\nTyzzeria is a genus of parasitic alveolates that with one exception (\"Tyzzeria boae\") infect the cells of the small intestine.\n\nThe genus \"Tyzzeria\" was first described by Allen in 1936.\n\nAs is all too common in protozoal taxonomy the validity of several of the species is controversial. Species occurring in Anseriforme birds appear to be valid whereas the other species may be misidentifications. The application of DNA based methods it is to be hoped will resolve these matters.\n\nThe oocysts lack sporocysts: each oocyst possesses eight sporozoites.\n\n\"Tyzzeria allenae\" - common goldeneye (\"Chenicus coromandelianus\") \n\"Tyzzeria boae\" - red tailed boa (\"Boa constrictor constrictor\")\n\"Tyzzeria chalcides\" - ocellated skink (\"Chalcides ocellatus\")\n\"Tyzzeria chenicusae\" - common goldeneye (\"Chenicus coromandelianus\") \n\"Tyzzeria galli\" - Ceylon jungle fowl (\"Gallus lafayettei\")\n\"Tyzzeria natrix\" - yamakagashi (\"Rhabdophis tigrinus\")\n\"Tyzzeria parvula\" - greater white-fronted goose (\"Anser albifrons\"), greylag goose (\"Anser anser\"), snow goose (\"Anser caerulescens\"), Ross' goose (\"Anser rossii\"), brent goose (\"Branta bernicla\"), Canada goose (\"Branta canadensis\"), tundra swan (\"Cygnus columbianus\")\n\"Tyzzeria pellerdyi\" - northern pintail (\"Anas acuta\"), American wigeon (\"Anas americana\"), northern shoveler (\"Anas clypeata\"), common teal (\"Anas crecca\"), blue-winged teal (\"Anas discors\"), mallard (\"Anas platyrhynchos\"), gadwall (\"Anas strepera\"), ferruginous duck (\"Aythya nyroca\")\n\"Tyzzeria perniciosa\" - northern pintail (\"Anas acutus\"), mallard (\"Anas platyrhynchos\"), lesser scaup (\"Anas affinis\"), lesser white-fronted goose (\"Aythya erythropus\"), tufted duck (\"Aythya fuligule\"), white-headed duck (\"Oxyura leucocephala\"), common shelduck (\"Tadorna tadora\")\n\"Tyzzeria peomysci\" - white-footed mouse (\"Peromyscus leucopus\"), deer mouse \"'Peromyscus maniculatus\") \n\"Tyzzeria perniciosa\" - lesser scaup (\"Aythya affinis\")\n\"Tyzzeria typhlopis\" - European blind snake (\"Typhlops vermicularis\")\n", "id": "29189131", "title": "Tyzzeria"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20885832", "text": "Precursor cell\n\nIn cell biology, a precursor cell, also called a blast cell or simply blast, is a partially differentiated cell, usually referred to as a unipotent cell that has lost most of its stem cells properties. A precursor cell is also known as a progenitor cell. These cells have multipotency. Precursor cells are known as the intermediate cell before they become differentiated after being a stem cell.\n\nUsually a precursor cell is a stem cell which has the capacity to differentiate into only one cell types. Sometimes \"precursor cell\" is used as an alternative term for unipotent stem cells.\n\nA blastoma is a type of cancer created by malignancies of precursor cells.\n\nIn embryology, precursor cells are a group of cells that differentiate later into one organ.\n\nPrecursor cells, or Progenitor cells, have many potential uses in medicine. There is research being done to use these cells to build heart valves, blood vessels and other tissues, by using blood and muscle precursor, or progenitor cells.\n\n\n\n", "id": "20885832", "title": "Precursor cell"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4553496", "text": "Interstitial cell\n\nInterstitial cell refers to any cell that lies between other cells.\n\nExamples include:\n", "id": "4553496", "title": "Interstitial cell"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15484616", "text": "Labile cell\n\nIn cellular biology, labile cells are cells that multiply constantly throughout life. The cells are alive for only a short period of time. Due to this,they can end up reproducing new stem cells and replace functional cells. Especially if the cells become injured through a process called necrosis, or even if the cells go through apoptosis.The way these cells regenerate and replace themselves is quite unique. While going through cell division, one of the two daughter cells actually becomes a new stem cell. This occurs so then that daughter cell can end up restoring the population of the stem cells that were lost. The other daughter cell separates itself into a functional cell in order to replace the lost, or injured cells during this process. Labile cells are one type of the cells that are involved in the division of cells. The other two types that are involved include stable cells and permanent cells. \n\nEach of these type of cells respond to injuries of the cells they occupy differently. Hepatocytes of the liver are thought to be a form of a labile cell because they can regenerate after they become injured. An example of this kind of regeneration can consist of performing a pediatric liver transplant. In which it consists of taking a piece of an adult's liver to replace a child's whole liver. Then the adult liver that was transplanted for the child's, would regenerate very quickly to around a normal size liver. Other cell types that are thought to be cells that are constantly dividing include skin cells, cells in the gastrointestinal tract, and blood cells in the bone marrow. Acting as stem cells for these cell types. \n\nIn labile cells, it is not a speed-up in the segments of the cell cycle (i.e. G1 phase, S phase, G2 phase and M phase), but rather a short or absent G0 phase that is responsible for the cells' constant division.\n\nConstantly dividing cells have a higher risk of becoming malignant and develop cancer, dividing uncontrollably. This is why muscle cancer is very rare, even though muscle tissue accounts for ~50% of total body weight, since muscle cells are not constantly dividing cells, and therefore not considered labile.\n\nIn addition, cytotoxic drugs, such as alkylating antineoplastic agents, used in treatment of cancer, work by inhibiting the proliferation of dividing cells, with the malignant cells as the desired target. However, this has the adverse effect of also striking against the cells normally dividing in the body, and thus impairing normal body function of hair, skin, GI tract and bone marrow.\n", "id": "15484616", "title": "Labile cell"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21006756", "text": "S9 fraction\n\nThe S9 fraction is the product of an organ tissue homogenate used in biological assays. The S9 fraction is most frequently used in assays that measure the metabolism of drugs and other xenobiotics. It is defined by the U.S. National Library of Medicine's \"IUPAC Glossary of Terms Used in Toxicology\" as the \"Supernatant fraction obtained from an organ (usually liver) homogenate by centrifuging at 9000 g for 20 minutes in a suitable medium; this fraction contains cytosol and microsomes.\" The microsomes component of the S9 fraction contain cytochrome P450 isoforms (phase I metabolism) and other enzyme activities. The cytosolic portion contains the major part of the activities of transferases (phase II metabolism). The S9 fraction is easier to prepare than purified microsomes.\n\nThe S9 fraction has been used in conjunction with the Ames test to assess the mutagenic potential of chemical compounds. Chemical substances sometimes require metabolic activation in order to become mutagenic. Furthermore, the metabolic enzymes of bacteria used in the Ames test differ substantially from those in mammals. Therefore, to mimic the metabolism of test substance that would occur in mammals, the S9 fraction is often added to the Ames test.\n\nThe S9 fraction has also been used to assess the metabolic stability of candidate drugs.\n\n", "id": "21006756", "title": "S9 fraction"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8275832", "text": "Paracellular transport\n\nParacellular transport refers to the transfer of substances across an epithelium by passing through the intercellular space \"between\" the cells. It is in contrast to transcellular transport, where the substances travel \"through\" the cell, passing through both the apical membrane and basolateral membrane.\n\nThe distinction has particular significance in renal physiology and intestinal physiology. Transcellular transport often involves energy expenditure whereas paracellular transport is unmediated and passive down a concentration gradient. Paracellular transport also has the benefit that absorption rate is matched to load because it has no transporters that can be saturated.\n\nIn most mammals, intestinal absorption of nutrients is thought to be dominated by transcellular transport, e.g., glucose is primarily absorbed via the SGLT1 transporter and other glucose transporters. Paracellular absorption therefore plays only a minor role in glucose absorption, although there is evidence that paracellular pathways become more available when nutrients are present in the intestinal lumen. In contrast, small flying vertebrates (small birds and bats) rely on the paracellular pathway for the majority of glucose absorption in the intestine. This has been hypothesized to compensate for an evolutionary pressure to reduce mass in flying animals, which resulted in a reduction in intestine size and faster transit time of food through the gut.\n\nCapillaries of the blood–brain barrier have only transcellular transport, in contrast with normal capillaries which have both transcellular and paracellular transport.\n\nThe paracellular pathway of transport is also important for the absorption of drugs in the gastrointestinal tract. The paracellular pathway allows the permeation of hydrophilic molecules that are not able to permeate through the lipid membrane by the transcellular pathway of absorption. This is particularly important for hydrophilic pharmaceuticals, which may not have affinity for membrane-bound transporters, and therefore may be excluded from the transcellular pathway.\nThe vast majority of drug molecules are transported through the transcellular pathway, and the few which rely on the paracellular pathway of transportation typically have a much lower bioavailability; for instance, levothyroxine has an oral bioavailability of 40 to 80%, and desmopressin of 0.16%.\n\nSome claudins form tight junction-associated pores that allow paracellular ion transport.\n\nThe tight junctions have a net negative charge, and are believed to preferentially transport positively charged molecules. Tight junctions in the intestinal epithelium are also known to be size-selective, such that large molecules (with molecular radii greater than about 4.5Å) are excluded. Larger molecules may also pass the intestinal epithelium via the paracellular pathway, although at a much slower rate and the mechanism of this transport via a \"leak\" pathway is unknown but may include transient breaks in the epithilial barrier.\n\nParacellular transport can be enhanced through the displacement of zona occludens proteins from the junctional complex by the use of permeation enhancers. Such enhancers include medium chain fatty acids (e.g. oleic acid), chitosans, zona occludens toxin, etc.\n", "id": "8275832", "title": "Paracellular transport"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14844566", "text": "Oxyphil cell (pathology)\n\nOxyphil cells are found in oncocytomas of the kidney, endocrine glands, and salivary glands.\n", "id": "14844566", "title": "Oxyphil cell (pathology)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3131507", "text": "RNA-binding protein\n\nRNA-binding proteins (often abbreviated as RBPs) are proteins that bind to the double or single stranded RNA in cells and participate in forming ribonucleoprotein complexes.\nRBPs contain various structural motifs, such as RNA recognition motif (RRM), dsRNA binding domain, zinc finger and others.\nThey are cytoplasmic and nuclear proteins. However, since most mature RNA is exported from the nucleus relatively quickly, most RBPs in the nucleus exist as complexes of protein and pre-mRNA called heterogeneous ribonucleoprotein particles (hnRNPs).\nRBPs have crucial roles in various cellular processes such as: cellular function, transport and localization. They especially play a major role in post-transcriptional control of RNAs, such as: splicing, polyadenylation, mRNA stabilization, mRNA localization and translation. Eukaryotic cells encode diverse RBPs, approximately 500 genes, with unique RNA-binding activity and protein–protein interaction. During evolution, the diversity of RBPs greatly increased with the increase in the number of introns. Diversity enabled eukaryotic cells to utilize RNA exons in various arrangements, giving rise to a unique RNP (ribonucleoprotein) for each RNA. Although RBPs have a crucial role in post-transcriptional regulation in gene expression, relatively few RBPs have been studied systematically.\n\nMany RBPs have modular structures and are composed of multiple repeats of just a few specific basic domains that often have limited sequences. These sequences are then arranged in varying combinations to fulfill the need for diversity. A specific protein's recognition of a specific RNA has evolved through the rearrangement of these few basic domains. Each basic domain recognizes RNA, but many of these proteins require multiple copies of one of the many common domains to function.\n\nAs nuclear RNA emerges from RNA polymerase, RNA transcripts are immediately covered with RNA-binding proteins that regulate every aspect of RNA metabolism and function including RNA biogenesis, maturation, transport, cellular localization and stability. All RBPs bind RNA, however they do so with different RNA-sequence specificities and affinities, which allows the RBPs to be as diverse as their targets and functions. These targets include mRNA, which codes for proteins, as well as a number of functional non-coding RNAs. NcRNAs almost always function as ribonucleoprotein complexes and not as naked RNAs. These non-coding RNAs include microRNAs, small interfering RNAs (siRNA), as well as splicesomal small nuclear RNAs (snRNA).\n\nAlternative splicing is a mechanism by which different forms of mature mRNAs (messengers RNAs) are generated from the same gene. It is a regulatory mechanism by which variations in the incorporation of the exons into mRNA leads to the production of more than one related protein, thus expanding possible genomic outputs. RBPs function extensively in the regulation of this process. Some binding proteins such as neuronal specific RNA-binding proteins, namely NOVA1, control the alternative splicing of a subset of hnRNA by recognizing and binding to a specific sequence in the RNA (YCAY where Y indicates pyrimidine, U or C). These proteins then recruit splicesomal proteins to this target site. SR proteins are also well known for their role in alternative splicing through the recruitment of snRNPs that form the splicesome, namely U1 snRNP and U2AF snRNP. However, RBPs are also part of the splicesome itself. The splicesome is a complex of snRNA and protein subunits and acts as the mechanical agent that removes introns and ligates the flanking exons. Other than core splicesome complex, RBPs also bind to the sites of \"Cis\"-acting RNA elements that influence exons inclusion or exclusion during splicing. These sites are referred to as exonic splicing enhancers (ESEs), exonic splicing silencers (ESSs), intronic splicing enhancers (ISEs) and intronic splicing silencers (ISSs) and depending on their location of binding, RBPs work as splicing silencers or enhancers [].\n\nThe most extensively studied form of RNA editing involves the ADAR protein. This protein functions through post-transcriptional modification of mRNA transcripts by changing the nucleotide content of the RNA. This is done through the conversion of adenosine to inosine in an enzymatic reaction catalyzed by ADAR. This process effectively changes the RNA sequence from that encoded by the genome and extends the diversity of the gene products. The majority of RNA editing occurs on non-coding regions of RNA; however, some protein-encoding RNA transcripts have been shown to be subject to editing resulting in a difference in their protein's amino acid sequence. An example of this is the glutamate receptor mRNA where glutamine is converted to arginine leading to a change in the functionality of the protein.\n\nPolyadenylation is the addition of a \"tail\" of adenylate residues to an RNA transcript about 20 bases downstream of the AAUAAA sequence within the three prime untranslated region. Polyadenylation of mRNA has a strong effect on its nuclear transport, translation efficiency, and stability. All of these as well as the process of polyadenylation depend on binding of specific RBPs. All eukaryotic mRNAs with few exceptions are processed to receive 3' poly (A) tails of about 200 nucleotides. One of the necessary protein complexes in this process is CPSF. CPSF binds to the 3' tail (AAUAAA) sequence and together with another protein called poly(A)-binding protein, recruits and stimulates the activity of poly(A) polymerase. Poly(A) polymerase is inactive on its own and requires the binding of these other proteins to function properly.\n\nAfter processing is complete, mRNA needs to be transported from the cell nucleus to cytoplasm. This is a three-step process involving the generation of a cargo-carrier complex in the nucleus followed by translocation of the complex through the nuclear pore complex and finally release of the cargo into cytoplasm. The carrier is then subsequently recycled. TAP/NXF1:p15 heterodimer is thought to be the key player in mRNA export. Over-expression of TAP in \"Xenopus laevis\" frogs increases the export of transcripts that are otherwise inefficiently exported. However TAP needs adaptor proteins because it is unable interact directly with mRNA. Aly/REF protein interacts and binds to the mRNA recruiting TAP.\n\nmRNA localization is critical for regulation of gene expression by allowing spatially regulated protein production. Through mRNA localization proteins are transcribed in their intended target site of the cell. This is especially important during early development when rapid cell cleavages give different cells various combinations of mRNA which can then lead to drastically different cell fates. RBPs are critical in the localization of this mRNA that insures proteins are only transcribed in their intended regions. One of these proteins is ZBP1. ZBP1 binds to beta-actin mRNA at the site of transcription and moves with mRNA into the cytoplasm. It then localizes this mRNA to the lamella region of several asymmetric cell types where it can then be translated. FMRP is another RBP involved in RNA localization. It was shown that in addition to other functions for FMRP in RNA metabolism, FMRP is involved in the stimulus-induced localization of several dendritic mRNAs in neuronal dendrites.\n\nTranslational regulation provides a rapid mechanism to control gene expression. Rather than controlling gene expression at the transcriptional level, mRNA is already transcribed but the recruitment of ribosomes is controlled. This allows rapid generation of proteins when a signal activates translation. ZBP1 in addition to its role in the localization of B-actin mRNA is also involved in the translational repression of beta-actin mRNA by blocking translation initiation. ZBP1 must be removed from the mRNA to allow the ribosome to properly bind and translation to begin.\n\nRNA-binding proteins exhibit highly specific recognition of their RNA targets by recognizing their sequences and structures. Specific binding of the RNA-binding proteins allow them to distinguish their targets and regulate a variety of cellular functions via control of the generation, maturation, and lifespan of the RNA transcript. This interaction begins during transcription as some RBPs remain bound to RNA until degradation whereas others only transiently bind to RNA to regulate RNA splicing, processing, transport, and localization. In this section, three classes of the most widely studied RNA-binding domains (RNA-recognition motif, double-stranded RNA-binding motif, zinc-finger motif) will be discussed.\n\nThe RNA recognition motif, which is the most common RNA-binding motif, is a small protein domain of 75–85 amino acids that forms a four-stranded β-sheet against the two α-helices. This recognition motif exerts its role in numerous cellular functions, especially in mRNA/rRNA processing, splicing, translation regulation, RNA export, and RNA stability. Ten structures of an RRM have been identified through NMR spectroscopy and X-ray crystallography. These structures illustrate the intricacy of protein–RNA recognition of RRM as it entails RNA–RNA and protein–protein interactions in addition to protein–RNA interactions. Despite their complexity, all ten structures have some common features. All RRMs' main protein surfaces' four-stranded β-sheet was found to interact with the RNA, which usually contacts two or three nucleotides in a specific manner. In addition, strong RNA binding affinity and specificity towards variation are achieved through an interaction between the inter-domain linker and the RNA and between RRMs themselves. This plasticity of the RRM explains why RRM is the most abundant domain and why it plays an important role in various biological functions.\n\nThe dsRBM, 70–75 amino-acid domain, plays a critical role in RNA processing, RNA localization, RNA interference, RNA editing, and translational repression. Although only three structures of dsRBMs have been currently discovered, all three structures possess uniting features that explain how dsRBMs only bind to dsRNA instead of dsDNA. The dsRBMs were found to interact along the RNA duplex via both α-helices and β1-β2 loop. Moreover, all three dsRBM structures make contact with the sugar-phosphate backbone of the major groove and of one minor groove, which is mediated by the β1-β2 loop along with the N-terminus region of the alpha helix 2. This interaction is a unique adaptation for the shape of an RNA double helix as it involves 2'-hydroxyls and phosphate oxygen. Despite the common structural features among dsRBMs, they exhibit distinct chemical frameworks, which permits specificity for a variety for RNA structures including stem-loops, internal loops, bulges or helices containing mismatches.\n\nCCHH-type zinc-finger domains are the most common DNA-binding domain within the eukaryotic genome. In order to attain high sequence-specific recognition of DNA, several zinc fingers are utilized in a modular fashion. Zinc fingers exhibit ββα protein fold in which a β-hairpin and a α-helix are joined together via a ion. Furthermore, the interaction between protein side-chains of the α-helix with the DNA bases in the major groove allows for the DNA-sequence-specific recognition. Despite its wide recognition of DNA, there has been recent discoveries that zinc fingers also have the ability to recognize RNA. In addition to CCHH zinc fingers, CCCH zinc fingers were recently discovered to employ sequence-specific recognition of single-stranded RNA through an interaction between intermolecular hydrogen bonds and Watson-Crick edges of the RNA bases. CCHH-type zinc fingers employ two methods of RNA binding. First, the zinc fingers exert non-specific interaction with the backbone of a double helix whereas the second mode allows zinc fingers to specifically recognize the individual bases that bulge out. Differing from the CCHH-type, the CCCH-type zinc finger displays another mode of RNA binding, in which single-stranded RNA is identified in a sequence-specific manner. Overall, zinc fingers can directly recognize DNA via binding to dsDNA sequence and RNA via binding to ssRNA sequence.\n\nRNA-binding proteins' transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation of RNA has a role in regulating the patterns of gene expression during development. Extensive research on the nematode \"C. elegans\" has identified RNA-binding proteins as essential factors during germline and early embryonic development. Their specific function involves the development of somatic tissues (neurons, hypodermis, muscles and excretory cells) as well as providing timing cues for the developmental events. Nevertheless, it is exceptionally challenging to discover the mechanism behind RBPs' function in development due to the difficulty in identifying their RNA targets. This is because most RBPs usually have multiple RNA targets. However, it is indisputable that RBPs exert a critical control in regulating developmental pathways in a concerted manner.\n\nIn \"Drosophila melanogaster\", Elav, Sxl and tra-2 are RNA-binding protein encoding genes that are critical in the early sex determination and the maintenance of the somatic sexual state. These genes impose effects on the post-transcriptional level by regulating sex-specific splicing in \"Drosophila\". Sxl exerts positive regulation of the feminizing gene \"tra\" to produce a functional tra mRNA in females. In \"C. elegans\", RNA-binding proteins including FOG-1, MOG-1/-4/-5 and RNP-4 regulate germline and somatic sex determination. Furthermore, several RBPs such as GLD-1, GLD-3, DAZ-1, PGL-1 and OMA-1/-2 exert their regulatory functions during meiotic prophase progression, gametogenesis, and oocyte maturation.\n\nIn addition to RBPs' functions in germline development, post-transcriptional control also plays a significant role in somatic development. Differing from RBPs that are involved in germline and early embryo development, RBPs functioning in somatic development regulate tissue-specific alternative splicing of the mRNA targets. For instance, MEC-8 and UNC-75 containing RRM domains localize to regions of hypodermis and nervous system, respectively. Furthermore, another RRM-containing RBP, EXC-7, is revealed to localize in embryonic excretory canal cells and throughout the nervous system during somatic development.\n\nZBP1 was shown to regulate dendritogenesis (dendrite formation) in hippocampal neurons. Other RNA-binding proteins involved in dendrite formation are Pumilio and Nanos, FMRP, CPEB and Staufen 1\n\nRBPs are emerging to play a crucial role in tumor development. In cancer, several alterations have been found in genes encoding for RNA-binding proteins. Many RBPs are differentially expressed in different cancer types for example KHDRBS1(Sam68), ELAVL1(HuR), FXR1. For some RBPs, the change in expression are related with Copy Number Variations (CNV), for example CNV gains of ESRP1, CELF3 in breast cancer, RBM24 in liver cancer, IGF2BP2, IGF2BP3 in lung cancer or CNV losses of KHDRBS2 in lung cancer. Some expression changes are cause due to protein affecting mutations on these RBPs for example SF3B1, SRSF2, RBM10, U2AF1, SF3B1, PPRC1, RBMXL1, HNRNPCL1 etc. Several studies have related this change in expression of RBPs to aberrant alternative splicing in cancer.\n\nAs RNA-binding proteins exert significant control over numerous cellular functions, they have been a popular area of investigation for many researchers. Due to its importance in the biological field, numerous discoveries regarding RNA-binding proteins' potentials have been recently unveiled. Recent development in experimental identification of RNA-binding proteins has extended the number of RNA-binding proteins significantly\n\nRNA-binding protein Sam68 controls the spatial and temporal compartmentalization of RNA metabolism to attain proper synaptic function in dendrites. Loss of Sam68 results in abnormal posttranscriptional regulation and ultimately leads to neurological disorders such as fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome. Sam68 was found to interact with the mRNA encoding β-actin, which regulates the synaptic formation of the dendritic spines with its cytoskeletal components. Therefore, Sam68 plays a critical role in regulating synapse number via control of postsynaptic β-actin mRNA metabolism.\n\nNeuron-specific CELF family RNA-binding protein UNC-75 specifically binds to the UUGUUGUGUUGU mRNA stretch via its three RNA recognition motifs for the exon 7a selection in \"C. elegans\"' neuronal cells. As exon 7a is skipped due to its weak splice sites in non-neuronal cells, UNC-75 was found to specifically activate splicing between exon 7a and exon 8 only in the neuronal cells.\n\nThe cold inducible RNA binding protein CIRBP plays a role in controlling the cellular response upon confronting a variety of cellular stresses, including short wavelength ultraviolet light, hypoxia, and hypothermia. This research yielded potential implications for the association of disease states with inflammation.\n\nSerine-arginine family of RNA-binding protein Slr1 was found exert control on the polarized growth in Candida albicans. Slr1 mutations in mice results in decreased filamentation and reduces damage to epithelial and endothelial cells that leads to extended survival rate compared to the Slr1 wild-type strains. Therefore, this research reveals that SR-like protein Slr1 plays a role in instigating the hyphal formation and virulence in \"C. albicans\".\n\n\n", "id": "3131507", "title": "RNA-binding protein"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=571538", "text": "Syncytium\n\nA syncytium or symplasm (; plural syncytia; from Greek: \"σύν (syn)\" = \"together\" + \"κύτος (kytos)\" = \"box, i.e. cell\") is a multinucleated cell that can result from multiple cell fusions of uninuclear cells (i.e., cells with a single nucleus), in contrast to a coenocyte, which can result from multiple nuclear divisions without accompanying cytokinesis. The term may also refer to cells interconnected by specialized membrane with gap junctions, as seen in the heart muscle cells and certain smooth muscle cells, which are synchronized electrically in an action potential.\n\nAnother (correct and well-established) use of the word syncytium is found in embryogenesis to refer to the coenocytic blastoderm embryos of invertebrates, such as \"Drosophila melanogaster\".\n\nIn protists, syncytia can be found in some rhizarians (e.g., chlorarachniophytes, plasmodiophorids, haplosporidians) and acellular slime moulds, dictyostelids (amoebozoans) and acrasids (excavates).\n\nSome examples of plant syncytia, which result during plant development, include:\n\nA syncytium is the normal cell structure for many fungi. Most fungi of Basidiomycota exist as a dikaryon in which thread-like cells of the mycelium are partially partitioned into segments each containing two differing nuclei, called a heterokaryon.\n\nA classic example of a syncytium is the formation of skeletal muscle. Large skeletal muscle fibers form by the fusion of thousands of individual muscle cells. The multinucleated (symplastic) arrangement is important in pathologic states such as myopathy, where focal necrosis (death) of a portion of a skeletal muscle fibers does not result in necrosis of the adjacent sections of that same skeletal muscle fiber, because those adjacent sections have their own nuclear material. Thus, myopathy is usually associated with such \"segmental necrosis\", but with some of the surviving segments being functionally cut off from their nerve supply via loss of continuity with the neuromuscular junction.\n\nThe syncytium of cardiac muscle is important because it allows rapid coordinated contraction of muscles along their entire length. Action potentials propagate along the surface of the muscle fiber from the point of synaptic contact, through intercalated discs. Although a syncytium, cardiac muscle differs because the cells are not long and multinucleated. Cardiac tissue is therefore described as a functional syncytium, as opposed to the true syncytium of skeletal muscle.\n\nCertain animal immune-derived cells may form aggregate cells also, for example the osteoclast cells responsible for bone resorption.\n\nAnother important vertebrate syncytium is in the placenta of placental mammals. Embryo-derived cells that form the interface with the maternal blood stream fuse together to form a multinucleated barrier - the syncytiotrophoblast. This is probably important to limit the exchange of migratory cells between the developing embryo and the body of the mother, as some blood cells are specialized to be able to insert themselves between adjacent epithelial cells. The syncytial epithelium of the placenta does not provide such an access path from the maternal circulation into the embryo.\n\nMuch of the body of Hexactinellid sponges is composed of syncitial tissue. This allows them to form their large siliceous spicules exclusively inside their cells.\n\nThe fine structure of tegument is essentially the same in both the cestodes and trematodes. A typical tegument is 7-16 μm thick, with distinct layers. It is a syncytium consisting of multinucleated tissues with no distinct cell boundaries. The outer zone of the syncytium, called the \"distal cytoplasm,\" is lined with a plasma membrane. This plasma membrane is in turn associated with a layer of carbohydrate-containing macromolecules known as the glycocalyx, that varies in thickness from one species to another. The distal cytoplasm is connected to the inner layer called the \"proximal cytoplasm\", which is the \"cellular region or cyton or perikarya\" through cytoplasmic tubes that are composed of microtubules. The proximal cytoplasm contains nuclei, endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi complex, mitochondria, ribosomes, glycogen deposits, and numerous vesicles. The internal most layer is bounded by a layer of connective tissue known as the \"basal lamina\". The basal lamina is followed by a thick layer of muscle.\n\nSyncytia can also form when cells are infected with certain types of viruses, notably HSV-1, HIV, MeV, and pneumoviruses, e.g. respiratory syncytial virus (RSV). These syncytial formations create distinctive cytopathic effects when seen in permissive cells. Because many cells fuse together, syncytium are also known as multinucleated giant cells or polykaryocytes. During infection, viral fusion proteins used by the virus to enter the cell are transported to the cell surface, where they can cause the host cell membrane to fuse with neighboring cells.\n\nTypically, the viral families that can cause syncytium are enveloped because viral envelope proteins on the surface of the host cell are needed to fuse with other cells. But, certain members of the Reoviridae family are notable exceptions due to a unique set of proteins known as fusion-associated small transmembrane (FAST) proteins. Reovirus induced syncytium formation is not found in humans, but is found in a number of other species and is caused by fusogenic orthoreoviruses. These fusogenic orthoreoviruses include reptilian orthoreovirus, avian orthoreovirus, Nelson Bay orthoreovirus, and baboon orthoreovirus.\n\nHIV infects CD4 T cells and makes the cell produce viral proteins, including fusion proteins. Then, the cell begins to display surface HIV glycoproteins, which are antigenic. Normally, a cytotoxic T cell will immediately come to \"inject\" lymphotoxins, such as perforin or granzyme, that will kill the infected T helper cell. However, if T helper cells are nearby, the gp41 HIV receptors displayed on the surface of the T helper cell will bind to other similar lymphocytes. This makes dozens of T helper cells fuse cell membranes into a giant, nonfunctional syncytium, which allows the HIV virion to kill many T helper cells by infecting only one.\n", "id": "571538", "title": "Syncytium"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=501216", "text": "Flow cytometry\n\nIn biotechnology, flow cytometry is a laser- or impedance-based, biophysical technology employed in cell counting, cell sorting, biomarker detection and protein engineering, by suspending cells in a stream of fluid and passing them through an electronic detection apparatus. A flow cytometer allows simultaneous multiparametric analysis of the physical and chemical characteristics of up to thousands of particles per second.\n\nFlow cytometry is routinely used in the diagnosis of health disorders, especially blood cancers, but has many other applications in basic research, clinical practice and clinical trials. A common variation involves linking the analytical capability of the flow cytometer to a sorting device, to physically separate and thereby purify particles of interest based on their optical properties. Such a process is called cell sorting, and the instrument is commonly termed a \"cell sorter\".\n\nThe first impedance-based flow cytometry device, using the Coulter principle, was disclosed in U.S. Patent 2,656,508, issued in 1953, to Wallace H. Coulter. Mack Fulwyler was the inventor of the forerunner to today's flow cytometers - particularly the cell sorter. Fulwyler developed this in 1965 with his publication in \"Science\". The first fluorescence-based flow cytometry device (ICP 11) was developed in 1968 by Wolfgang Göhde from the University of Münster, filed for patent on 18 December 1968 and first commercialized in 1968/69 by German developer and manufacturer Partec through Phywe AG in Göttingen. At that time, absorption methods were still widely favored by other scientists over fluorescence methods. Soon after, flow cytometry instruments were developed, including the Cytofluorograph (1971) from Bio/Physics Systems Inc. (later: Ortho Diagnostics), the PAS 8000 (1973) from Partec, the first FACS (Fluorescence-activated cell sorting) instrument from Becton Dickinson (1974), the ICP 22 (1975) from Partec/Phywe and the Epics from Coulter (1977/78). The first label-free high-frequency impedance flow cytometer based on a patented microfluidic \"lab-on-chip\", Ampha Z30, was introduced by Amphasys (2012).\n\nThe original name of the fluorescence-based flow cytometry technology was \"pulse cytophotometry\" (German: \"Impulszytophotometrie\"), based on the first patent application on fluorescence-based flow cytometry. At the 5th American Engineering Foundation Conference on Automated Cytology in Pensacola (Florida) in 1976 - eight years after the introduction of the first fluorescence-based flow cytometer (1968) - it was agreed to commonly use the name \"flow cytometry\", a term that quickly became popular.\n\nModern flow cytometers are able to analyze many thousand particles per second, in \"real time,\" and, if configured as cell sorters, can actively separate and isolate particles at similar rates having specified optical properties. A flow cytometer is similar to a microscope, \nexcept that, instead of producing an image of the cell, flow cytometry offers high-throughput, large-scale, automated quantification of specified optical parameters on a cell-by-cell basis. To analyze solid tissues, a single-cell suspension must first be prepared.\n\nA flow cytometer has five main components: a flow cell, a measuring system, a detector, an amplification system, and a computer for analysis of the signals. The flow cell has a liquid stream (sheath fluid), which carries and aligns the cells so that they pass single file through the light beam for sensing. The measuring system commonly use measurement of impedance (or conductivity) and optical systems - lamps (mercury, xenon); high-power water-cooled lasers (argon, krypton, dye laser); low-power air-cooled lasers (argon (488 nm), red-HeNe (633 nm), green-HeNe, HeCd (UV)); diode lasers (blue, green, red, violet) resulting in light signals. The detector and analog-to-digital conversion (ADC) system converts analog measurements of forward-scattered light (FSC) and side-scattered light (SSC) as well as dye-specific fluorescence signals into digital signals that can be processed by a computer. The amplification system can be linear or logarithmic.\n\nThe process of collecting data from samples using the flow cytometer is termed 'acquisition'. Acquisition is mediated by a computer physically connected to the flow cytometer, and the software which handles the digital interface with the cytometer. The software is capable of adjusting parameters (e.g., voltage, compensation) for the sample being tested, and also assists in displaying initial sample information while acquiring sample data to ensure that parameters are set correctly. Early flow cytometers were, in general, experimental devices, but technological advances have enabled widespread applications for use in a variety of both clinical and research purposes. Due to these developments, a considerable market for instrumentation, analysis software, as well as the reagents used in acquisition such as fluorescently labeled antibodies has developed.\n\nModern instruments usually have multiple lasers and fluorescence detectors. The current record for a commercial instrument is ten lasers and 30 fluorescence detectors. Increasing the number of lasers and detectors allows for multiple antibody labeling, and can more precisely identify a target population by their phenotypic markers. Certain instruments can even take digital images of individual cells, allowing for the analysis of fluorescent signal location within or on the surface of cells.\n\nThe data generated by flow-cytometers can be plotted in a single dimension, to produce a histogram, or in two-dimensional dot plots or even in three dimensions. The regions on these plots can be sequentially separated, based on fluorescence intensity, by creating a series of subset extractions, termed \"gates.\" Specific gating protocols exist for diagnostic and clinical purposes especially in relation to hematology. Individual single cells are often distinguished from cell doublets or higher aggregates by their \"time-of-flight\" (denoted also as a \"pulse-width\") through the narrowly focused laser beam\n\nThe plots are often made on logarithmic scales. Because different fluorescent dyes' emission spectra overlap, signals at the detectors have to be compensated electronically as well as computationally. Data accumulated using the flow cytometer can be analyzed using software, e.g., JMP (statistical software), WinMDI, Flowing Software, and web-based Cytobank (all :freeware), Cellcion, FCS Express, FlowJo, FACSDiva, CytoPaint (aka Paint-A-Gate), VenturiOne, CellQuest Pro, Infinicyt or Cytospec. Once the data is collected, there is no need to stay connected to the flow cytometer and analysis is most often performed on a separate computer. This is especially necessary in core facilities where usage of these machines is in high demand.\n\nRecent progress on automated population identification using computational methods has offered an alternative to traditional gating strategies. Automated identification systems could potentially help findings of rare and hidden populations. Representative automated methods include FLOCK in Immunology Database and Analysis Portal (ImmPort), SamSPECTRAL and flowClust in Bioconductor, and FLAME in GenePattern. T-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (tSNE) is an algorithm designed to perform dimensionality reduction, to allow visualization of complex multi-dimensional data in a two-dimensional \"map\". Collaborative efforts have resulted in an open project called FlowCAP (Flow Cytometry: Critical Assessment of Population Identification Methods,) to provide an objective way to compare and evaluate the flow cytometry data clustering methods, and also to establish guidance about appropriate use and application of these methods.\n\nFluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) is a specialized type of flow cytometry. It provides a method for sorting a heterogeneous mixture of biological cells into two or more containers, one cell at a time, based upon the specific light scattering and fluorescent characteristics of each cell. It is a useful scientific instrument as it provides fast, objective and quantitative recording of fluorescent signals from individual cells as well as physical separation of cells of particular interest. The technique was expanded by Len Herzenberg, who was responsible for coining the term FACS. Herzenberg won the Kyoto Prize in 2006 for his seminal work in flow cytometry.\n\nThe cell suspension is entrained in the center of a narrow, rapidly flowing stream of liquid. The flow is arranged so that there is a large separation between cells relative to their diameter. A vibrating mechanism causes the stream of cells to break into individual droplets. The system is adjusted so that there is a low probability of more than one cell per droplet. Just before the stream breaks into droplets, the flow passes through a fluorescence measuring station where the fluorescent character of each cell of interest is measured. An electrical charging ring is placed just at the point where the stream breaks into droplets. A charge is placed on the ring based immediately prior to fluorescence intensity being measured, and the opposite charge is trapped on the droplet as it breaks from the stream. The charged droplets then fall through an electrostatic deflection system that diverts droplets into containers based upon their charge. In some systems, the charge is applied directly to the stream, and the droplet breaking off retains charge of the same sign as the stream. The stream is then returned to neutral after the droplet breaks off.\n\nThe acronym FACS is trademarked and owned by Becton, Dickinson and Company.\n\nA wide range of fluorophores can be used as labels in flow cytometry. Fluorophores, or simply \"fluors\", are typically attached to an antibody that recognizes a target feature on or in the cell; they may also be attached to a chemical entity with affinity for the cell membrane or another cellular structure. Each fluorophore has a characteristic peak excitation and emission wavelength, and the emission spectra often overlap. Consequently, the combination of labels which can be used depends on the wavelength of the lamp(s) or laser(s) used to excite the fluorochromes and on the detectors available. The maximum number of distinguishable fluorescent labels is thought to be 17 or 18, and this level of complexity necessitates laborious optimization to limit artifacts, as well as complex deconvolution algorithms to separate overlapping spectra. Flow cytometry uses fluorescence as a quantitative tool; the utmost sensitivity of flow cytometry is unmatched by other fluorescent detection platforms such as confocal microscopy. Absolute fluorescence sensitivity is generally lower in confocal microscopy because out-of-focus signals are rejected by the confocal optical system and because the image is built up serially from individual measurements at every location across the cell, reducing the amount of time available to collect signal.\n\nQuantum dots are sometimes used in place of traditional fluorophores because of their narrower emission peaks.\n\nMass cytometry overcomes the fluorescent labeling limit by utilizing lanthanide isotopes attached to antibodies. This method could theoretically allow the use of 40 to 60 distinguishable labels and has been demonstrated for 30 labels. Mass cytometry is fundamentally different from flow cytometry: cells are introduced into a plasma, ionized, and associated isotopes are quantified via time-of-flight mass spectrometry. Although this method permits the use of a large number of labels, it currently has lower throughput capacity than flow cytometry. It also destroys the analysed cells, precluding their recovery by sorting.\n\nIn addition to the ability to label and identify individual cells via fluorescent antibodies, cellular products such as cytokines, proteins, and other factors may also be measured as well. Similar to ELISA sandwich assays, cytometric bead array (CBA) assays use multiple bead populations typically differentiated by size and different levels of fluorescence intensity to distinguish multiple analytes in a single assay. The amount of the analyte captured is detected via a biotinylated antibody against a secondary epitope of the protein, followed by a streptavidin-R-phycoerythrin treatment. The fluorescent intensity of R-phycoerythrin on the beads is quantified on a flow cytometer equipped with a 488 nm excitation source. Concentrations of a protein of interest in the samples can be obtained by comparing the fluorescent signals to those of a standard curve generated from a serial dilution of a known concentration of the analyte. Commonly also referred to as cytokine bead array (CBA).\n\nImpedance-based single cell analysis systems are commonly known as Coulter counters. They represent a well-established method for counting and sizing virtually any kind of cells and particles. The label-free technology has recently been enhanced by a \"lab-on-a-chip\" based approach and by applying high frequency alternating current (AC) in the radio frequency range (from 100 kHz to 30 MHz) instead of a static direct current (DC) or low frequency AC field. This patented technology allows a highly accurate cell analysis and provides additional information like membrane capacitance and viability. The relatively small size and robustness allow battery powered on-site use in the field.\n\nThis list is very long and constantly expanding.\n\n\nThe technology has applications in a number of fields, including molecular biology, pathology, immunology, plant biology and marine biology. It has broad application in medicine especially in transplantation, hematology, tumor immunology and chemotherapy, prenatal diagnosis, genetics and sperm sorting for sex preselection. Also, it is extensively used in research for the detection of DNA damage, caspase cleavage and apoptosis. In neuroscience, co-expression of cell surface and intracellular antigens can also be analyzed. In marine biology, the autofluorescent properties of photosynthetic plankton can be exploited by flow cytometry in order to characterise abundance and community structure. In protein engineering, flow cytometry is used in conjunction with yeast display and bacterial display to identify cell surface-displayed protein variants with desired properties.\n\n\n\n", "id": "501216", "title": "Flow cytometry"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26999638", "text": "Lipoblast\n\nA lipoblast is a precursor cell for an adipocyte.\n\nAlternate terms include adipoblast and preadipocyte.\n\nEarly stages are almost indistinguishable from fibroblasts.\n\nLipoblasts are seen in liposarcoma and characteristically have abundant multivacuolated clear cytoplasm and a dark staining (hyperchromatic), indented nucleus.\n\n", "id": "26999638", "title": "Lipoblast"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16063197", "text": "Membrane ruffling\n\nMembrane ruffling (also known as cell ruffling) is the formation of a motile cell surface that contains a meshwork of newly polymerized actin filaments. It can also be regarded as one of the earliest structural changes observed in the cell. The GTP-binding protein Rac is the regulator of this membrane ruffling. Changes in the Polyphosphoinositide metabolism and changes in Ca level of the cell may also play an important role. A number of actin-binding and organizing proteins localize to membrane ruffles and potentially target to transducing molecules.\n\nMembrane ruffling is a characteristic feature of many actively migrating cells. When the membrane is unable to attach to the substrate, the membrane protrusion is recycled back into the cell. The ruffling of membranes is thought to be controlled by a group of enzymes known as Rho GTPases, specifically RhoA, Rac1 and cdc42.\n\nSome bacteria such as enteropathogenic \"E. coli\" and enterohemorrhagic \"E. coli\" can induce membrane ruffling by secreting toxins via the type three secretion system and modifying the host cytoskeleton. Such toxins include EspT, Map, and SopE, which mimic RhoGEF and activate endogenous Rho GTPases to manipulate actin polymerisation in the infected cell.\n\n\n", "id": "16063197", "title": "Membrane ruffling"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21151506", "text": "Membrane bound polyribosome\n\nIn cell biology, membrane bound polyribosomes are attached to a cell's endoplasmic reticulum. When certain proteins are synthesized by a ribosome they can become \"membrane-bound\". The newly produced polypeptide chains are inserted directly into the endoplasmic reticulum by the ribosome and are then transported to their destinations. Bound ribosomes usually produce proteins that are used within the cell membrane or are expelled from the cell via \"exocytosis\".\n", "id": "21151506", "title": "Membrane bound polyribosome"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19860816", "text": "Near-equilibrium enzymatic flux transfer networks\n\nNear-equilibrium enzymatic flux transfer networks are intra-cellular mechanisms for moving ATP and a wide range of other metabolites around the cell from where they are produced to where they are needed, at a rate faster than simple diffusion through the cell's cytoplasm. They can act as a buffer system, as there are linear arrays of pathways with several intermediates in the chain, making the supply of metabolites more reliable. A set of parallel shuttles is also less sensitive to disruption than a single shuttle would be. This allows for automatic coupling between supply and demand, and they can almost instantly supply of a ligand to parts of cells that require it. Hence the concentrations of enzymes in the cell is very large (as opposed to a high concentration of metabolites or solutes) which helps osmotic homeostasis, and means transport of metabolites is not dependent on wastefully large concentration gradients. This means that they are less costly in terms of energy used.\n", "id": "19860816", "title": "Near-equilibrium enzymatic flux transfer networks"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9833587", "text": "CC chemokine receptors\n\nCC chemokine receptors (or beta chemokine receptors) are integral membrane proteins that specifically bind and respond to cytokines of the CC chemokine family. They represent one subfamily of chemokine receptors, a large family of G protein-linked receptors that are known as seven transmembrane (7-TM) proteins since they span the cell membrane seven times. To date, ten true members of the CC chemokine receptor subfamily have been described. These are named CCR1 to CCR10 according to the IUIS/WHO Subcommittee on Chemokine Nomenclature.\n\nThe CC chemokine receptors all work by activating the G protein G.\n\nCCR1 was the first CC chemokine receptor identified and binds multiple inflammatory/inducible (see inducible gene) CC chemokines (including CCL4, CCL5, CCL6, CCL14, CCL15, CCL16 and CCL23). In humans, this receptor can be found on peripheral blood lymphocytes and monocytes. There is some suggestion that this chemokine receptor is restricted to memory T-cells within the lymphocyte pool. This receptor is also designated cluster of differentiation marker CD191.\n\nCCR2 can interact with CCL2, CCL8 and CCL16 and has been identified on the surface of monocytes, activated memory T cells, B cells, and basophils in humans, and also in peritoneal macrophages in mice. CCR2 is also designated CD192.\n\nCCR3 is a receptor for multiple inflammatory/inducible CC chemokines, including CCL11, CCL26, CCL7, CCL13, CCL15, CCL24 and CCL5 that attract eosinophils, and CCL28 that attracts B and T lymphocytes to mucosal tissues. It is most highly expressed in both eosinophils and basophils, but can also be found in Th1 and Th2 cells and airway epithelial cells. Thus CCR3 plays a role in allergic reactions. CCR3 is also known as CD193.\n\nCCR4 is expressed on Th2 T lymphocytes and is up-regulated by T cell receptor activation. However, some reports suggest a role for this receptor also in trafficking of dendritic cells. The CC chemokines CCL3, CCL5, CCL17 and CCL22 signal through this receptor.\n\nCCR5 is expressed on several cell types including peripheral blood-derived dendritic cells, CD34+ hematopoietic progenitor cells and certain activated/memory Th1 lymphocytes. This receptor is well defined as a major coreceptor implicated in susceptibility to HIV-1 infection and disease. This receptor has several CC chemokine ligands including CCL2, CCL3, CCL4, CCL5, CCL11, CCL13, CCL14 and CCL16.\n\nCCR6, a receptor for CCL20, is expressed on unactivated memory T-cells and some dendritic cells. CCR6 is also expressed on Th17 cells. CCR6 is down-regulated in activated T-cells.\n\nCCR7 is a highly important receptor with a role in trafficking of B and T lymphocytes and dendritic cells to and across high endothelial venules and positioning those cells correctly in T cell zones of secondary lymphoid organs. Its ligands include the related chemokines CCL19 and CCL21, (previously called ELC and SLC).\n\nCCR8 is associated with Th2 lymphocytes and is therefore found predominantly in the thymus (in humans) although some expression can be found in the brain, spleen, lymph node, and monocytes at the nucleotide level. The ligands for this receptor are CCL1 and CCL16.\n\nCCR9 was previously called orphan receptor GPR 9-6 and is very highly expressed in thymus (on both immature and mature T-cells) while low in lymph nodes and spleen. CCR9 is also abundant in the gut, with its expression associated with T cells of the intestine. The specific ligand of this receptor is CCL25. To note, the chemokine binding protein D6 had previously been named CCR9, but this molecule is a scavenger receptor not a true (signaling) chemokine receptor.\n\nCCR10 is receptor for CCL27 and CCL28 that was originally called orphan receptor GPR2. CCR10 has been implicated in inflammation of the skin, and has been shown to recruit regulatory T cells (Tregs) to mucosal layers.\n\nThis molecule was originally designated CCR11 due to its ability to bind several CC chemokines (including CCL19, CCL21 and CCL25) and its structural similarity to chemokine receptors. However, due to the inability of this molecule (also known as CCRL1 and CCX CKR) to generate a signal following ligand interaction, it has been suggested that it is a scavenger receptor for chemokines and not a bona fide chemokine receptor. Thus CCRL1 should not be called CCR11 under the guidelines of the IUIS/WHO Subcommittee on Chemokine Nomenclature.\n", "id": "9833587", "title": "CC chemokine receptors"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9470331", "text": "Cell-penetrating peptide\n\nCell-penetrating peptides (CPPs) are short peptides that facilitate cellular intake/uptake of various molecular equipment (from nanosize particles to small chemical molecules and large fragments of DNA). The \"cargo\" is associated with the peptides either through chemical linkage via covalent bonds or through non-covalent interactions. The function of the CPPs are to deliver the cargo into cells, a process that commonly occurs through endocytosis with the cargo delivered to delivery vectors for use in research and medicine. Current use is limited by a lack of cell specificity in CPP-mediated cargo delivery and insufficient understanding of the modes of their uptake, that is why other delivery mechanisms have been developed like CellSqueeze and electroporation.\n\nCPPs typically have an amino acid composition that either contains a high relative abundance of positively charged amino acids such as lysine or arginine or has sequences that contain an alternating pattern of polar/charged amino acids and non-polar, hydrophobic amino acids. These two types of structures are referred to as polycationic or amphipathic, respectively. A third class of CPPs are the hydrophobic peptides, containing only apolar residues, with low net charge\nor have hydrophobic amino acid groups that are crucial for cellular uptake.\n\nThe first CPP was discovered independently by two laboratories in 1988, when it was found that the trans-activating transcriptional activator (TAT) from human immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1) could be efficiently taken up from the surrounding media by numerous cell types in culture. Since then, the number of known CPPs has expanded considerably and small molecule synthetic analogues with more effective protein transduction properties have been generated.\n\nCell-penetrating peptides are of different sizes, amino acid sequences, and charges but all CPPs have one distinct characteristic, which is the ability to translocate the plasma membrane and facilitate the delivery of various molecular cargoes to the cytoplasm or an organelle. There has been no real consensus as to the mechanism of CPP translocation, but the theories of CPP translocation can be classified into three main entry mechanisms: direct penetration in the membrane, endocytosis-mediated entry, and translocation through the formation of a transitory structure. CPP transduction is an area of ongoing research. \n\nCell-penetrating peptides (CPP) are able to transport different types of cargo molecules across plasma membrane; thus, they act as molecular delivery vehicles. They have numerous applications in medicine as drug delivery agents in the treatment of different diseases including cancer and virus inhibitors, as well as contrast agents for cell labeling. Examples of the latter include acting as a carrier for GFP, MRI contrast agents, or quantum dots. \n\nThe majority of early research suggested that the translocation of polycationic CPPs across biological membranes occurred via an energy-independent cellular process. It was believed that translocation could progress at 4C and most likely involved a direct electrostatic interaction with negatively charged phospholipids. Researchers proposed several models in attempts to elucidate the biophysical mechanism of this energy-independent process. Although CPPs promote direct effects on the biophysical properties of pure membrane systems, the identification of fixation artifacts when using fluorescent labeled probe CPPs caused a reevaluation of CPP-import mechanisms. These studies promoted endocytosis as the translocation pathway. An example of direct penetration has been proposed for TAT. The first step in this proposed model is an interaction with the unfolded fusion protein (TAT) and the membrane through electrostatic interactions, which disrupt the membrane enough to allow the fusion protein to cross the membrane. After internalization, the fusion protein refolds due the chaperone system. This mechanism was not agreed upon, and other mechanisms involving clathrin-dependent endocytosis have been suggested.\n\nMany more detailed methods of CPP uptake have been proposed including transient pore formation. This mechanism involves strong interactions between cell-penetrating peptides and the phosphate groups on both sides of the lipid bilayer, the insertion of positively charged arginine side-chains that nucleate the formation of a transient pore, followed by the translocation of cell-penetrating peptides by diffusing on the pore surface. This mechanism explains how key ingredients, such as the cooperation among the peptides, the large positive charge, and specifically the guanidinium groups, contribute to the uptake. The proposed mechanism also illustrates the importance of membrane fluctuations. Indeed, mechanisms that involve large fluctuations of the membrane structure, such as transient pores and the insertion of charged amino acid side-chains, may be common and perhaps central to the functions of many membrane protein functions.\n\nEndocytosis is the second mechanism liable for cellular internalization. Endocytosis is the process of cellular ingestion by which the plasma membrane folds inward to bring substances into the cell. During this process cells absorb material from the outside of the cell by imbibing it with their cell membrane. The classification of cellular localization using fluorescence or by endocytosis inhibitors is the basis of most examination. However, the procedure used during preparation of these samples creates questionable information regarding endocytosis. Moreover, studies show that cellular entry of penetratin by endocytosis is an energy-dependent process. This process is initiated by polyarginines interacting with heparan sulphates that promote endocytosis. Research has shown that TAT is internalized through a form of endocytosis called macropinocytosis.\n\nStudies have illustrated that endocytosis is involved in the internalization of CPPs, but it has been suggested that different mechanisms could transpire at the same time. This is established by the behavior reported for penetratin and transportan wherein both membrane translocation and endocytosis occur concurrently.\n\nThe third mechanism responsible for the translocation is based on the formation of the inverted micelles. Inverted micelles are aggregates of colloidal surfactants in which the polar groups are concentrated in the interior and the lipophilic groups extend outward into the solvent. According to this model, a penetratin dimer combines with the negatively charged phospholipids, thus generating the formation of an inverted micelle inside of the lipid bilayer. The structure of the inverted micelles permits the peptide to remain in a hydrophilic environment. \n\nThe last mechanism implied that internalization occurs by peptides that belong to the family of primary amphipathic peptides, MPG and Pep-1. Two very similar models have been proposed based on physicochemical studies, consisting of circular dichroism, Fourier transform infrared, and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. These models are associated with electrophysiological measurements and investigations that have the ability to mimic model membranes such as monolayer at the air-water interface. The structure giving rise to the pores is the major difference between the proposed MPG and Pep-1 model. In the MPG model, the pore is formed by a b-barrel structure, whereas the Pep-1 is associated with helices. In addition, strong hydrophobic phospholipid-peptide interactions have been discovered in both models. \nIn the two peptide models, the folded parts of the carrier molecule correlate to the hydrophobic domain, although the rest of the molecule remains unstructured.\n\nCell-penetrating peptide facilitated translocation is a topic of great debate. Evidence has been presented that translocation could use several different pathways for uptake. In addition, the mechanism of translocation can be dependent on whether the peptide is free or attached to cargo. The quantitative uptake of free or CPP connected to cargo can differ greatly but studies have not proven whether this change is a result of translocation efficiency or the difference in translocation pathway. It is probable that the results indicate that several CPP mechanisms are in competition and that several pathways contribute to CPP internalization.\n\nNucleic acid-based macromolecules such as siRNA, antisense oligonucleotide, decoy DNA, and plasmid have been realized as promising biological and pharmacological therapeutics in regulation of gene expression. However, unlike other small-molecular drugs, their development and applications are limited by high molecular weight and negative charges, which results in poor uptake efficiency and low cellular traffic. To overcome these problems, several different delivery systems have been developed, including CPP-nucleic acid conjugate, which is a very powerful tool.\n\nMost CPP-nucleic acid complexes that have been proposed so far are formed through covalent bonding. A range of CPP-nucleic acid complexes have been synthesized through different chemistries that are either stable or cleavable linkages. And the most widely used method in publication is cleavable disulfide linkages through total stepwise solid-phase synthesis or solution-phase or solid-phase fragment coupling. Some other strategies like stable amide, thiazolidine, oxime and hydrazine linkage have also been developed. \nHowever, those covalent linking methods are limited by the concern that the synthetic covalent bond between CPP and nucleic acid may alter the biological activity of the latter. Thus, a new non-covalent strategy requiring no chemical modification with short amphipathic CPPs, like MPG and Pep-1 as carriers has been successfully applied for delivery of cargoes. These non-covalent conjugates are formed through either electrostatic or hydrophobic interactions. With this method, cargoes such as nucleic acids and proteins could be efficiently delivered while maintaining full biological activity.\n\nShort interfering RNA (siRNA) is a very powerful new tool that can interfere with and silence the expression of specific disease gene. To improve cellular uptake of siRNA, CPP strategies have been applied to facilitate the delivery of siRNA into cells through either covalent or non-covalent linkages. In one study, siRNA is covalently linked to transportan and penetratin by disulfide-linkage at 5'-end of the sense strands of siRNA to target luciferase or eGFP mRNA reporters. In another study, TAT-siRNA conjugate through a stable thiomaleimide linkage at 3'-end of siRNA was delivered into HeLa cells for eGFP gene silencing.\n\nHowever, non-covalent strategies appear to be better for siRNA delivery with a more significant biological response. In one study, MPG/siRNA complexes formed through stable non-covalent strategy showed successful introduction of siRNA into cultured cells and induced robust regulation of target mRNA. Furthermore, MPG/siRNA complexes have also been applied for delivery of siRNA \"in vivo\" into mouse blastocytes for gene regulation. MPG forms highly stable complexes with siRNA with a low degradation rate and can be easily functionalized for specific targeting, which are major advantages compared with the covalent CPP technology.\n\nsiRNA cell delivery represent a valuable tool for treatment of cancer disease, viral infections and genetic disorders. However, classical strategies involve covalent linking of cargo molecules and CPPs, which does not provide efficient protection of siRNA molecules \"in vivo\"; thus results reported in literature are not consistent. Recently, non-covalent strategies have been successfully reported. Secondary amphipathic peptides based on aromatic tryptophan and arginine residues linked with lysine as spacer have been reported under the name of CADY. CADY contains a short peptide sequence of 20 amino acids, with the sequence “Ac-GLWRALWRLLRSLWRLLWRA-cysteamide.\"\n\nThis peptide is able to self-assemble in a helical shape with hydrophilic and hydrophobic residues on different side of the molecule, it has two different orientations of the surface that represent the lowest energy and it is able to form complexes with siRNA at different molar ratio varying from 1:1 to 80:1. \nCADY is able to form a shield around siRNA molecule protecting it from biodegradative processes that may occur before cellular penetration occurs. These types of substrates may present important applications \"in vivo\".\n\nAntisense oligonucleotides (asONs) have been used in basic research and are being developed as possible medical treatments. CPP strategies have been developed to deliver antisense oligomers such as PNA and PMO into cells. Overcoming the repulsion by the cell membrane of negative-charged ONs and the degradation of asONs by enzymes, CPPs increase asONs bioavailability. Two types of neutral ON analogues, peptide nucleic acid (PNA) and phosphorodiamidate morpholino oligomers (PMO or Morpholino) are becoming dominant in this area. PNA has been conjugated with various CPPs either through disulfide linkages or through stable amide bonds. For example, antisense activity within cells that blocked expression of the galanin receptor was observed when a 21-mer PNA was coupled to the penetratin. Results on antiviral activity with PNA targeting HIV-1 have also been reported through disulfide linkage with TAT. CPP-PMO conjugates have also been successfully used to inhibit the replication of several viruses such as SARS and influenza and attachment of CPPs has improved the efficacy of splice-modifying Morpholinos in development for treatment of Duchenne muscular dystrophy\n\nDecoy DNA is an exogenous double-strand DNA (dsDNA), which can mimic a promoter sequence that can inhibit the activity of a specific transcription factor. But dsDNA has the same problem as other therapeutics, poor bioavailability. In one study, CPPs TP and TP10 were coupled to NFкB decoy DNA, which blocked the effect of interleukin-1-induced NFкB activation and IL-6 gene expression. In another study, TP10 coupled Myc decoy DNA decreased proliferative capacity of N2a cells.\n\nIndividual genes can be inserted into specific sites on plasmids, and recombinant plasmids can be introduced into living cells. A method using macro-branched TAT has been proposed for plasmid DNA delivery into various cell lines and showed significant transfection capabilities. Multimers of TAT have been found to increase transfection efficiency of plasmid DNA by 6-8 times more than poly-L-arginine or mutant TAT2-M1, and by 390 times compared with the standard vectors.\n\nThe development of therapeutic proteins that has presented a valuable method to treat diseases is limited by low efficiency of traditional delivery methods. Recently, several methods using CPPS as vehicles to deliver biologically active, full-length proteins into living cells and animals have been reported.\n\nSeveral groups have successfully delivered CPP fused proteins \"in vitro\". TAT was able to deliver different proteins, such as horseradish peroxidase and RNase A across cell membrane into the cytoplasm in different cell lines \"in vitro\". The size range of proteins with effective delivery is from 30kDa to 120-150kDa. In one study, TAT-fused proteins are rapidly internalized by lipid raft−dependent macropinocytosis using a transducible TAT−Cre recombinase reporter assay on live cells. In another study, a TAT-fused protein was delivered into mitochondria of breast cancer cells and decreased the survival of breast cancer cells, which showed capability of TAT-fusion proteins to modulate mitochondrial function and cell survival. Moreover, cR10, a cyclic poly-arginine CPP, enabled the endocytose independent transduction of antigen binding proteins through the cellular membrane with immediate bioavailability. Thereby, the authors of the study were able to deliver fluorescent antigen binding proteins into cells facilitating live-cell immunostaining. However, very few in vivo studies have succeeded. In one study, in vivo delivery of TAT- or penetratin-crosslinked Fab fragments yielded varied organ distributions and an overall increase in organ retention, which showed tissue localization.\n\nA non-covalent method that forms CPP/protein complexes has also been developed to address the limitations in covalent methods, such as chemical modification before crosslinking, and denaturation of proteins before delivery. In one study, a short amphipathic peptide carrier, Pep-1, and protein complexes have proven effective for delivery. It was shown that Pep-1 could facilitate rapid cellular uptake of various peptides, proteins, and even full-length antibodies with high efficiency and less toxicity. This approach has greatly simplified the formulation of reagents.\n\nCPPs found applications as transporters of contrast agents across plasma membranes. These contrast agents are able to label the tumor cells, making the compounds important tools in cancer diagnosis; they are also used in \"in vivo\" and \"in vitro\" cellular experiments. \nThe most important classes of CPP are isolated from viruses, such as TAT (transactivated-transcription) derived from HIV-1, penetratin, and transportan. The most widely used CPPs are based on TAT derivatives. TAT is an arginine-rich CPP. Several improvements for this substrate includes the usage of unnatural β or γ amino acids. This strategy offers multiple advantages, such resistance to proteolytic degradation, a natural degradation process by which peptide bonds are hydrolyzed to amino acids. Unnatural acid insertion in the peptide chain has multiple advantages. It facilitates the formation of stable foldamers with distinct secondary structure. β-Peptides are conformationally more stable in aqueous solution than naturally occurring peptides, especially for small chains. The secondary structure is reinforced by the presence of a rigid β-amino acid, which contains cyclohexane or cyclopentane fragments. These fragments generate a more rigid structure and influence the opening angle of the foldamer. These features are very important for new peptide design. Helical β-peptides mimic antimicrobial activities of host defense peptides.\nA new strategy to enhance the cellular up-take capacity of CPP is based on association of polycationic and polyanionic domains that are separated by a linker. Cellular association of polycationic residues (polyarginine) with negatively charged membrane cells is effectively blocked by the presence of polyanionic residue (poly-glutamic acid) and the linker, which confer the proper distance between these two charged residues in order to maximize their interaction. These peptides adopt hairpin structure, confirmed by overhauser effect correlation for proton-proton proximities of the two charged moieties.\nAt this stage only the linker is exposed to protease hydrolysis \"in vivo\" applications. The linker hydrolysis occur and the two charged fragments experience more conformational freedom. In the absence of linker, the cationic peptide can interact more efficient with the target cell and cellular uptake occurs before proteolysis. This strategy found applications in labeling tumor cells \"in vivo\". Tumor cells were marked in minutes.\nLinker degradation can be predicted by the amount of D-aminoacids (the unnatural isomer) incorporated in the peptide chain, this restricts \"in vivo\" proteolysis to the central linker.\n\nQuantum dots (QD) represent a relative new class of fluorescent probes that have superior optical properties than classical organic dyes based on fluorescent groups. The main advantages of QD include high quantum yields, broad absorption spectra, size-tunable emission spectra, and good resistance to chemical and photochemical degradation. \nIn vivo tests have shown that several positively charged peptides (based on guanidine residues) are able to cross cell membranes and to promote cellular uptake of attached molecules including quantum dots.\nQD properties can be easily modified by changing the organic substrates linked to them, offering a versatile biological tool as cell markers. Research is in progress to optimize the methodologies for the intracellular delivery of QD and QD bioconjugates, and characterization of long-term in vivo photophysical properties.\n\nQuantum dots are colloidal nanocrystals, based on a cadmium-selenium (CdSe) core covered with a zinc-sulfur (ZnS) layer. This substrate has been used intensively as a cellular marker because CdSe emits in the visible domain and is an excellent contrast agent, while the ZnS layer protects the core from oxidation and also the leeching of CdSe into the surrounding solution. This strategy also improves the photo-luminescence yield. The properties can be tuned by the thickness of the ZnS protective layers. Colloidal QD emission can be modulated from UV-Vis to the infrared by using different types of coating agents, such as ZnS, CdS, ZnSe, CdTe and PbSe. The properties of quantum dots can be also tuned by the synthetic scheme, high temperature solvent/ligand mixtures that influence the nanocrystal properties. High-quality QD contrast agents are obtained at elevated temperatures; however, because they have lower water solubility, their usage as cell markers is limited. Further functionalization with hydrophilic ligands is required.\n\nThe advantages of QD are represented by their fast action; they are able to label a target tissue or cell in seconds. In vivo studies show that QD are able to selectively label cancer cells, and they accumulate at tumor sites. Tumor cells labeled with QD can be tracked with multiphoton microscopy as they invade lung tissue. In both studies, spectral imaging and autofluorescent subtraction allowed multicolour in vivo visualization of cells and tissues. A major drawback of QD is their relatively high toxicity. Functionalizations with different substrates that increase bioaffinity and decrease toxicity are in progress. For instance, sulfur from the QD shell is able to form reversible disulfide bonds with a wide class of organic compounds.\n\nMagnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a powerful tool for disease diagnosis such as cancer metastasis and inflammation, using different metal chelates. Metal chelates increase the contrast signal between normal and diseased tissues by changing the nuclear relaxation times of water molecules in their proximities. Typical examples are Gd3+ low-molecular-weight chelates, and superparamagnetic iron oxide (SPIO). \"In vivo\" administration of these agents allows the label of tumor cells; or cells can be labeled \"in vitro\" with contrast agents and then they can be injected and monitored \"in vivo\" by using MRI techniques.\n\nSPIO nanoparticles confer high sensitivity in MRI but they have lower affinity for cells; they work at high concentrations. Functionalizations of these compounds using dendrimeric guanidines showed similar activities as TAT-based CPPs but higher toxicity. New substrates based on dendrons with hydroxyl or amine peripheries show low toxicity. Applications of SPIO includes cell labeling \"in vivo\"; due to low toxicity, they are clinically approved for use in liver, spleen, and gastrointestinal imaging.\n\nThe presence of octamer arginine residues allows cell membrane transduction of various cargo molecules including peptides, DNA, siRNA, and contrast agents. However, the ability of cross caca membrane is not unidirectional; arginine-based CPPs are able to enter-exit the cell membrane, displaying an overall decreasing concentration of contrast agent and a decrease of magnetic resonance (MR) signal in time. This limits their application \"in vivo\". To solve this problem, contrast agents with disulfide, reversible bond between metal chelate and transduction moiety enhance the cell-associated retention. The disulfide bond is reduced by the target cell environment and the metal chelate remains trapped in the cytoplasm, increasing the retention time of chelate in the target cell.\n\n", "id": "9470331", "title": "Cell-penetrating peptide"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17729026", "text": "Cell-free protein synthesis\n\nCell-free protein synthesis, also known as \"in vitro\" protein synthesis or CFPS, is the production of protein using biological machinery in a cell-free system, that is, without the use of living cells. The \"in vitro\" protein synthesis environment is not constrained by a cell wall or homeostasis conditions necessary to maintain cell viability. Thus CFPS enables direct access and control of the translation environment which is advantageous for a number of applications including optimization of protein production, optimization of protein complexes, to study protein synthesis, incorporating non-natural amino acids, high-throughput screens, and synthetic biology.\n\nCommon components of a cell-free reaction include a cell extract, an energy source, a supply of amino acids, cofactors such as magnesium, and the DNA with the desired genes. A cell extract is obtained by lysing the cell of interest and centrifuging out the cell walls, DNA genome, and other debris. The remains are the necessary cell machinery including ribosomes, aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases, translation initiation and elongation factors, nucleases, etc.\n\nTwo types of DNA can be used in CFPS: plasmids and linear expression templates (LETs). Plasmids are circular, and only made inside cells. LETs can be made much more effectively via PCR , which replicates DNA much faster than raising cells in an incubator. While LETs are easier and faster to make, plasmid yields are usually much higher in CFPS. Because of this, much research today is focused on optimizing CFPS LET yields to approach the yields of CFPS with plasmids.\n\nAn energy source is an important part of a cell-free reaction. Usually, a separate mixture containing the needed energy source, along with a supply of amino acids, is added to the extract for the reaction. Common sources are phosphoenol pyruvate, acetyl phosphate, and creatine phosphate.\n\nCFPS has many advantages over the traditional \"in vivo\" synthesis of proteins. Most notably, a cell-free reaction, including extract preparation, usually takes 1 –2 days, whereas \"in vivo\" protein expression may take 1–2 weeks.\n\nCFPS is an open reaction. The lack of cell wall allows direct manipulation of the chemical environment. Samples are easily taken, concentrations optimized, and the reaction can be monitored. In contrast, once DNA is inserted into live cells, the reaction cannot be accessed until it is over and the cells are lysed.\n\nAnother advantage to CFPS is the lack of concern for toxicity. Some desired proteins and labeled proteins are toxic to cells when synthesized.\nSince live cells are not being used, the toxicity of the product protein is not a significant concern.\n\nA major application of CFPS is incorporation of unnatural amino acids into protein structures (see expanded genetic code). The openness of the reaction is ideal for inserting the modified tRNAs and unnatural amino acids required for such a reaction.\n\nSynthetic biology has many other uses and is a bright future in fields such as protein evolution, nanomachines, nucleic acid circuits, and synthesis of virus-like particles for vaccines and drug therapy.\n\nOne challenge associated with CFPS is the degradation of the DNA by endogenous nucleases in the cell extract. This is particularly problematic with LETs. Cells have endonucleases that attack random sites of a DNA strands; however, much more common are the exonucleases which attack DNA from the ends. Since plasmids are circular and have no end to which the exonucleases may attach, they are not affected by the latter. LETs, however, are susceptible to both. Because of LET vulnerability, much research today is focused on optimizing CFPS LET yields to approach the yields of CFPS using plasmids.\n\nOne example of this improved protection with plasmids is use of the bacteriophage lambda gam protein. Gam is an inhibitor of RecBCD, an exonuclease found in \"Escherichia coli\" (\"E. coli\"). With the use of gam, CFPS yields with LETs were greatly increased, and were comparable to CFPS yields with plasmids. PURE extracts can also be made, eliminating the concern of exonucleases. These extracts are expensive to make and are not currently an economical solution to the issue of exogenous DNA degradation.\n\nCommon cell extracts in use today are made from \"E. coli\" (ECE), rabbit reticulocytes (RRL), wheat germ (WGE), and insect cells (ICE). All of these extracts are commercially available.\n\nECE is the most popular lysate for several reasons. It is the most inexpensive extract and the least time intensive to create. Also, large amounts of \"E. coli\" are easily grown, and then easily lysed through use of a homogenizer. ECE also provides the highest protein yields. However, high yield production can limit the complexity of the synthesized protein, particularly in post-translational modification. In that regard, the lower efficient eukaryotic systems could be advantageous, provided that modifying enzyme systems have been maintained in the extracts.\n\nEach eukaryotic system has their advantages and disadvantages. For example, WGE extract produces the highest yields of the three eukaryotic extracts; however, it is not as effective for some post-translational modifications such as glycosylation. When choosing an extract, the type of post-translational modification, desired yields, and cost should be taken into account.\n\nThe first elucidation of a codon was done by Marshall Nirenberg and Heinrich J. Matthaei in 1961 at the National Institutes of Health. They used a cell-free system to translate a poly-uracil RNA sequence (or UUUUU... in biochemical terms) and discovered that the polypeptide they had synthesized consisted of only the amino acid phenylalanine. They thereby deduced from this poly-phenylalanine that the codon UUU specified the amino-acid phenylalanine. Extending this work, Nirenberg and his coworkers were able to determine the nucleotide makeup of each codon.\n\n", "id": "17729026", "title": "Cell-free protein synthesis"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21450492", "text": "Cellular microbiology\n\nCellular microbiology is a discipline that bridges microbiology and cell biology.\n\nThe term \"cellular microbiology\" was coined in 1996 in an article published in \"Science\". Cooperation and mutual dependency between microbiology and cell biology had been increasing in the years before that, and the emergence of a new discipline had been suggested and discussed in several scientific conferences.\n\nCellular microbiology attempts to use pathogenic microbes as tools for cell-biology research, and to employ cell-biology methods to understand the pathogenicity of microbes. Toxins and virulence factors from microbes have been used for decades to influence processes in eukaryotic cells and to study them. It has increasingly appeared that applying a purified toxin on a cell does not always provide the complete picture, and that understanding the role of the toxin in pathogenicity, the way the toxin promotes the microbe, the way the toxin is produced and the co-evolution of the toxin and its host-cell counterparts, is crucial.\n\nNumerous eukaryotic cellular processes have been clarified using microbial \"tools\". A major subject in this category is the cytoskeleton. Many microbes modify and influence the synthesis or degradation of the host-cell cytoskeleton, in particular the actin network. Intracellular microbes, such as the bacteria \"Salmonella\" and \"Shigella\", elicit actin polymerization in host cells that otherwise do not internalize microbes (non-phagocytes). This causes the formation of projections that eventually engulf the bacteria. Bacteria such as \"Yersinia\" inhibit actin polymerization in phagocytes, thereby preventing their uptake. Cellular microbiology tries to understand these processes and how they promote infection. Other eukaryotic processes that microbes influence and that are researched using microbes are signal transduction, metabolism, vesicle trafficking, cell cycle and transcriptional regulation, to name but a few.\n\nRecently, the field of Cellular Microbiology has been expanded to incorporate investigation of the cell biology of microbes themselves. \"The field of cellular microbiology is a coalescence of two fields: molecular microbiology and cell biology,\" said Professor Jacek Hawiger, Chair of Microbiology and Immunology at Vanderbilt University. Particularly in the case of bacterial cells, new technology is starting to be used to reveal a high level of organization within the bacterial cells themselves. For example, high-resolution fluorescence microscopy and atomic force microscopy are both being used to show just how sophisticated bacterial cells are.\n", "id": "21450492", "title": "Cellular microbiology"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20723266", "text": "Counterflow centrifugation elutriation\n\nCounterflow centrifugal elutriation (CCE) is a liquid clarification technique. This method enables scientists to separate different cells with different sizes. Since cell size is correlated with cell cycle stages this method also allows the separation of cells at different stages of the cell cycle.\n\nThe key concept is that larger cells tend to stay within the flowing buffer solution while smaller cells will be washed away follow the buffer solution (different sedimentation property within the buffer solution), and cells will have different sedimentation properties in different cell cycle stages.\n\nThe basic principle of separating the cells inside CCE is the balance between centripetal and the counter flow drag force. When the cells enter the elutriation chamber, all the cells will stay at the outer edge of the chamber due to centrifugal force. Then when the flow rate of the buffer solution increases, the solution tends to push the cells towards the middle of the CCE. When the counter flow drag force outweighs the centripetal force, particles will be driven by the net force and leave the chamber. Smaller particles are able to leave the chamber at lower flow rates. In contrast, larger particles will stay within the elutriation chamber. Therefore, buffer flow rate can be used to control size sorting within the elutriation chamber.\n\nDuring the separation, the cell only needs to be suspended in a buffer solution and enter a centrifuge, the whole processes does not involve any chemical (e.g. staining) and physical (e.g. attachment of antibody, lyses of cell membrane) effect on the cells, so the cell will remain unchanged before and after the separation. Because of this, the collected cells can be used for further experiment or further separation by other techniques. Finally the CCE rely on centrifugal force and the counter flow drag force to separate the cells, so the speed of separation is fast. In summary:\n\nAs mentioned above, the CCE separates cells based on their sedimentation property but not specific features (e.g. surface protein, cell shape). It cannot separate different types of cells which have similar sedimentation properties. This means that previous purification needs to be done for mixed cell type sample. The CCE is also limited to cells which are able to be individually suspended in the buffer solution. Cells which always attach to something cannot be separated by the CCE.\n", "id": "20723266", "title": "Counterflow centrifugation elutriation"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24500492", "text": "Pericentriolar material\n\nPericentriolar material (PCM, sometimes also called pericentriolar matrix) is an amorphous mass of protein which makes up the part of the animal centrosome that surrounds the two centrioles. The PCM contains proteins responsible for microtubule nucleation and anchoring including γ-tubulin, pericentrin and ninein.\n\nAlthough the PCM appears amorphous by electron microscopy, Super-resolution microscopy finds that it is organized. The PCM have 9 fold symmetry that mimics the symmetry of the centriole. Some PCM Proteins are organized such that one end of the protein is found near the centriole and the other end is farther away from the centriole.\nThe PCM size is dynamic during the cell cycle. After the cell division the PCM size is reduced in a process named Centrosome Reduction. During the G2 phase of the cell cycle the PCM size grow in a process named centrosome maturation.\n\nAccording to the Gene Ontology, the following human proteins are associated with the PCM :\n\n", "id": "24500492", "title": "Pericentriolar material"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=200192", "text": "Chromatid\n\nA chromatid (Greek \"khrōmat-\" 'color' + \"-id\") is one copy of a newly copied chromosome which is still joined to the original chromosome by a single centromere. \n\nBefore replication, one chromosome is composed of one DNA molecule. Following replication, each chromosome is composed of two DNA molecules; in other words, DNA replication itself increases the amount of DNA but does \"not\" increase the number of chromosomes. The two identical copies—each forming one half of the replicated chromosome—are called chromatids. During the later stages of cell division these chromatids separate longitudinally to become individual chromosomes.\n\nChromatid pairs are normally genetically identical, and said to be homozygous; however, if mutation(s) occur, they will present slight differences, in which case they are heterozygous. The pairing of chromatids should not be confused with the ploidy of an organism, which is the number of homologous versions of a chromosome.\n\nChromonema is the fibre-like structure in prophase in the primary stage of DNA condensation. In metaphase, they are called chromatids.\n\nChromatids may be sister or non-sister chromatids. A sister chromatid is either one of the two chromatids of the same chromosome joined together by a common centromere. A pair of sister chromatids is called a dyad. Once sister chromatids have separated (during the anaphase of mitosis or the anaphase II of meiosis during sexual reproduction), they are again called chromosomes. Although having the same genetic mass as the individual chromatids that made up its parent, the daughter \"molecules\" are called chromosomes in a similar way that one child of a pair of twins is not referred to as a single twin. \nThe DNA sequence of two sister chromatids is completely identical (apart from very rare DNA copying errors). Sometimes sister chromatids do not separate during cell division, leading to a situation known as nondisjunction where one daughter cell lacks the chromosome while the other gets both copies of it. Conditions arising from nondisjunction include Edwards Syndrome, Down Syndrome and Turner Syndrome. \n\nSister chromatid exchange (SCE) is the exchange of genetic information between two sister chromatids. SCEs can occur during mitosis or meiosis. SCEs appear to primarily reflect DNA recombinational repair processes responding to DNA damage (see articles Sister chromatids and Sister chromatid exchange).\n\n\"Non-sister chromatids\", on the other hand, refers to either of the two chromatids of paired homologous chromosomes, that is, the pairing of a paternal chromosome and a maternal chromosome. In chromosomal crossovers, non-sister (homologous) chromatids form chiasmata to exchange genetic material during the prophase I of meiosis (See Homologous recombination).\n\n3. \"Chromosomes, Chromatids and Chromatin\" www.khanacademy.org. Retrieved 13 September 2017. \n", "id": "200192", "title": "Chromatid"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26342640", "text": "Apical constriction\n\nApical constriction is the process in which contraction of the apical side of a cell causes the cell to take on a wedged shape. Generally, this shape change is coordinated across many cells of an epithelial layer, generating forces that can bend or fold the cell sheet.\n\nApical constriction plays a central role in important morphogenetic events in both invertebrates and vertebrates. It is typically the first step in any invagination process and is also important in folding tissues at specified hingepoints.\n\nDuring gastrulation in both invertebrates and vertebrates, apical constriction of a ring of cells leads to blastopore formation. These cells are known as bottle cells, for their eventual shape. Because all of the cells constrict on the apical side, the epithelial sheet bends convexly on the basal side.\n\nIn vertebrates, apical constriction plays a role in a range of other morphogenetic processes such neurulation, placode formation, and primitive streak formation.\n\nApical constriction occurs primarily through the contraction of cytoskeletal elements. The specific mechanism depends on the species, the cell type, and the morphogenetic movement. Here, we present a few well-studied examples in model organisms.\n\nDuring \"Xenopus\" gastrulation, bottle cells are located in the dorsal marginal zone and apically constrict inwards to initiate involution of the blastopore. In these cells, apical constriction occurs when actomyosin contractility folds the cell membrane to reduce the apical surface area. Endocytosis of the membrane at the apical side further reduces surface area. Active trafficking of these endocytosed vesicles along microtubule tracks is also believed to be important, since the depolymerization (but not stabilization) of microtubules reduces the extent of apical constriction.\n\nAlthough apical constriction is always observed, it is not necessary for gastrulation, indicating that there are other morphogenetic forces working in parallel. Researchers have shown that the removal of bottle cells does not inhibit gastrulation, but simply makes it less efficient. Bottle cell removal does, however, result in deformed embryos.\n\nNeural tube cells in \"Xenopus\" apically constrict during the initial invagination as well as during hingepoint folding. Here, the mechanism depends upon the protein Shroom3, which is sufficient to drive apical constriction. Because Shroom3 is an actin-binding protein and accumulates on the apical side, the most likely mechanism is that Shroom3 aggregates the actin meshwork, generating a squeezing force. Ectopic Shroom3 has been shown to be sufficient to induce apical constriction, but only in cells with apico-basal polarity.\n\nThe molecular picture of apical constriction is most complete for \"Drosophila\". During \"Drosophila\" gastrulation, apical constriction of midline cells initiates invagination to create the ventral furrow. Like in \"Xenopus\", actomyosin contractility plays a major role in constricting the apical side of the cell. The constricting cells have an actin meshwork directly beneath the apical membrane as well as circumferential actin belts lining the adherens junctions between cells. Pulsed contractions of the actin meshwork are believed to be primarily responsible for reducing the apical surface area.\n\nIn Drosophila, researchers have also pinpointed the molecules responsible for \"coordinating\" apical constriction in time. Folded Gastrulation (Fog), a secreted protein, and Concertina, a G alpha protein, are members of the same pathway that ensure that apical constriction is initiated in the right cells at the right time. The transmembrane protein T48 is part of a redundant pathway that is also needed for coordination of apical constriction. Both pathways must be disrupted in order to completely block ventral furrow formation. Both pathways also regulate the localization of RhoGEF2, a member of the Rho family GTPases, which are known to regulate actin dynamics.\n\n", "id": "26342640", "title": "Apical constriction"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1390410", "text": "Reticular cell\n\nA reticular cell is a type of fibroblast that synthesizes collagen alpha-1(III) and uses it to produce reticular fibers. The cell surrounds the fibers with its cytoplasm, isolating it from other tissue components and cells. Reticular cells provide structural support, since they produce and maintain the thin networks of fibres that are a framework for most lymphoid organs.\n\nThey are found in many tissues including the spleen, lymph nodes and lymph nodules. They also direct B cells and T cells to specific regions within the tissue.\n", "id": "1390410", "title": "Reticular cell"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30696412", "text": "Substrate adhesion molecules\n\nSubstrate adhesion molecules (SAMs) are proteins that attach cells to specific compounds in the extracellular matrix (a process known as cell adhesion).\n\nSome of the amino acids in the SAM bind to components of the extracellular matrix, while others bind to integrins on the surface of the cell. Integrin molecules are composed of two chains of amino acids, one of which is connected to the actin filaments in the cytoskeleton, while the other is connected to the SAMs. This enables external activity in the extracellular matrix to affect the shape and movement of the cell.\n\nSAMs do not have to be made by the cells that bind to them. They can also link to other SAMs, influencing each other's behavior.\n\nThere is very strong evidence SAMs also have a key role in neuronal morphogenesis.\n\n\n", "id": "30696412", "title": "Substrate adhesion molecules"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31040311", "text": "Chemically defined medium\n\nA chemically defined medium is a growth medium suitable for the in vitro cell culture of human or animal cells in which all of the chemical components are known. Standard cell culture media are commonly supplemented with animal serum (such as fetal bovine serum, FBS) as a source of nutrients and other ill-defined factors. The technical disadvantages to using serum include its undefined nature, batch-to-batch variability in composition, and the risk of contamination.\n\nThere is a clear distinction between serum-free media and chemically defined media. Serum-free media may contain undefined animal-derived products such as serum albumin (purified from blood), hydrolysates, growth factors, hormones, carrier proteins, and attachment factors. These undefined animal-derived products will contain complex contaminants, such as the lipid content of albumin. In contrast, chemically defined media require that all of the components must be identified and have their exact concentrations known. Therefore, a chemically defined medium must be entirely free of animal-derived components and cannot contain either fetal bovine serum, bovine serum albumin or human serum albumin. To achieve this, chemically defined media is commonly supplemented with recombinant versions of albumin and growth factors, usually derived from rice or \"E. coli\", or synthetic chemical such as the polymer polyvinyl alcohol which can reproduce some of the functions of BSA/HSA.\n\nThe constituents of a chemically defined media include: a basal media (such as DMEM, F12, or RPMI 1640, containing amino acids, vitamins, inorganic salts, buffers, antioxidants and energy sources), which is supplemented with recombinant albumin, chemically defined lipids, recombinant insulin and/or zinc, recombinant transferrin or iron, selenium and an antioxidant thiol such as 2-mercaptoethanol or 1-thioglycerol.\n\n\nChemically defined media also allows researchers who are studying in the field of cell physiology (especially extracellular) and or molecule–cell interactions to eliminate any variables that may arise due to the effects of unknown components in the medium.\n\nAnimal culture media can be divided into six subsets based on the level of defined media (Jayme and Smith, 2000): From lowest definition to highest these are:\n\n\nThe term chemically defined media is often misused in the literature to refer to serum albumin-containing media. The term 'defined media' can also be used to describe this type of media. Media formulations containing the media supplement B27 (supplied by Invitrogen) are often erroneously referred to as chemically defined media (e.g. Yao et al., 2006) despite this product containing bovine serum albumin (Chen et al., 2008) using the above definitions this type of media is referred to as serum-free media. Peptide-free, protein-free, chemically defined media are rarely successfully formulated except for CHO and insect cells.\n\nAnimal protein-free media, containing human serum albumin, human transferrin, but potentially animal-derived insulin and lipids.\n\nXeno-free media, containing human serum albumin, human transferrin, human insulin, and chemically defined lipids.\n\n\n", "id": "31040311", "title": "Chemically defined medium"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15375808", "text": "Basophilia\n\nBasophilia is a condition where the basophil quantity is abnormally elevated (more than 10 basophils per liter of blood). Basophilia is associated with pruritus (itching) due to the release of histamine.\n\nBasophilia as an isolated finding is uncommon. However it is a common feature of myeloproliferative disorders and particularly prominent in chronic myelogenous leukemia.\n\nConditions Associated with Increased Numbers of Blood Basophils\nGiven the definition of basophilia, diagnosis is made from a complete blood count where there are more than 10 basophils per liter of blood.\n", "id": "15375808", "title": "Basophilia"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16942737", "text": "CAMP-dependent pathway\n\nIn the field of molecular biology, the cAMP-dependent pathway, also known as the adenylyl cyclase pathway, is a G protein-coupled receptor-triggered signaling cascade used in cell communication.\n\ncAMP was discovered by Earl Sutherland and Ted Rall. cAMP is considered a secondary messenger along with Ca. Sutherland eventually won a Nobel Prize in 1971.\n\nG protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are a large family of integral membrane proteins that respond to a variety of extracellular stimuli. Each GPCR binds to and is activated by a specific ligand stimulus that ranges in size from small molecule catecholamines, lipids, or neurotransmitters to large protein hormones. When a GPCR is activated by its extracellular ligand, a conformational change is induced in the receptor that is transmitted to an attached intracellular heterotrimeric G protein complex. The G alpha subunit of the stimulated G protein complex exchanges GDP for GTP and is released from the complex.\n\nIn a cAMP-dependent pathway, the activated G alpha subunit binds to and activates an enzyme called adenylyl cyclase, which, in turn, catalyzes the conversion of ATP into cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP).\nIncreases in concentration of the second messenger cAMP may lead to the activation of\n\nThe PKA enzyme is also known as cAMP-dependent enzyme because it gets activated only if cAMP is present. Once PKA is activated, it phosphorylates a number of other proteins including:\nAlso phosphorylate AMPA\n\nSpecificity of signaling between a GPCR and its ultimate molecular target through a cAMP-dependent pathway may be achieved through formation of a multiprotein complex that includes the GPCR, adenylyl cyclase, and the effector protein.\n\nIn humans, cAMP works by activating protein kinase A (PKA, cAMP-dependent protein kinase), one of the first few kinases discovered. It has four sub-units two catalytic and two regulatory. cAMP binds to the regulatory sub-units. It causes them to break apart from the catalytic sub-units. The Catalytic sub-units make their way in to the nucleus to influence transcription.Further effects mainly depend on cAMP-dependent protein kinase, which vary based on the type of cell.\n\ncAMP-dependent pathway is necessary for many living organisms and life processes. Many different cell responses are mediated by cAMP. These include increase in heart rate, cortisol secretion, and breakdown of glycogen and fat. cAMP is for the maintenance of memory in the brain, relaxation in the heart, and water absorbed in the kidney.\nThis pathway can activate enzymes and regulate gene expression. The activation of preexisting enzymes is a much faster process, whereas regulation of gene expression is much longer and can take up to hours. The cAMP pathway is studied through loss of function (inhibition) and gain of function (increase) of cAMP.\n\nIf cAMP-dependent pathway is not controlled, it can ultimately lead to hyper-proliferation, which may contribute to the development and/or progression of cancer.\n\nActivated GPCRs cause a conformational change in the attached G protein complex, which results in the G alpha subunit's exchanging GDP for GTP and separation from the beta and gamma subunits. The G alpha subunit, in turn, activates adenylyl cyclase, which quickly converts ATP into cAMP. This leads to the activation of the cAMP-dependent pathway. This pathway can also be activated downstream by directly activating adenylyl cyclase or PKA.\n\nMolecules that activate cAMP pathway include:\n\nThe G alpha subunit slowly catalyzes the hydrolysis of GTP to GDP, which in turn deactivates the G protein, shutting off the cAMP pathway. The pathway may also be deactivated downstream by directly inhibiting adenylyl cyclase or dephosphorylating the proteins phosphorylated by PKA.\n\nMolecules that inhibit the cAMP pathway include:\n", "id": "16942737", "title": "CAMP-dependent pathway"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1079466", "text": "Förster resonance energy transfer\n\nFörster resonance energy transfer (FRET), fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET), resonance energy transfer (RET) or electronic energy transfer (EET) is a mechanism describing energy transfer between two light-sensitive molecules (chromophores). A donor chromophore, initially in its electronic excited state, may transfer energy to an acceptor chromophore through nonradiative dipole–dipole coupling. The efficiency of this energy transfer is inversely proportional to the sixth power of the distance between donor and acceptor, making FRET extremely sensitive to small changes in distance.\n\nMeasurements of FRET efficiency can be used to determine if two fluorophores are within a certain distance of each other. Such measurements are used as a research tool in fields including biology and chemistry.\n\nFRET is analogous to near-field communication, in that the radius of interaction is much smaller than the wavelength of light emitted. In the near-field region, the excited chromophore emits a virtual photon that is instantly absorbed by a receiving chromophore. These virtual photons are undetectable, since their existence violates the conservation of energy and momentum, and hence FRET is known as a \"radiationless\" mechanism. Quantum electrodynamical calculations have been used to determine that radiationless (FRET) and radiative energy transfer are the short- and long-range asymptotes of a single unified mechanism.\n\nFörster resonance energy transfer is named after the German scientist Theodor Förster. When both chromophores are fluorescent, the term \"fluorescence resonance energy transfer\" is often used instead, although the energy is not actually transferred by fluorescence. In order to avoid an erroneous interpretation of the phenomenon that is always a nonradiative transfer of energy (even when occurring between two fluorescent chromophores), the name \"Förster resonance energy transfer\" is preferred to \"fluorescence resonance energy transfer\"; however, the latter enjoys common usage in scientific literature. It should also be noted that FRET is not restricted to fluorescence. It can occur in connection with phosphorescence as well.\n\nThe FRET efficiency (formula_1) is the quantum yield of the energy transfer transition, i.e. the fraction of energy transfer event occurring per donor excitation event:\n\nwhere formula_3 is the rate of energy transfer, formula_4 the radiative decay rate, and the formula_5 are the rate constants of any other de-excitation pathways.\n\nThe FRET efficiency depends on many physical parameters that can be grouped as 1) the distance between the donor and the acceptor (typically in the range of 1–10 nm), 2) the spectral overlap of the donor emission spectrum and the acceptor absorption spectrum, and 3) the relative orientation of the donor emission dipole moment and the acceptor absorption dipole moment.\n\nformula_1 depends on the donor-to-acceptor separation distance formula_7 with an inverse 6th-power law due to the dipole-dipole coupling mechanism:\nwith formula_9 being the Förster distance of this pair of donor and acceptor, i.e. the distance at which the energy transfer efficiency is 50%.\nThe Förster distance depends on the overlap integral of the donor emission spectrum with the acceptor absorption spectrum and their mutual molecular orientation as expressed by the following equation:\nwhere formula_11 is the fluorescence quantum yield of the donor in the absence of the acceptor, formula_12 is the dipole orientation factor, formula_13 is the refractive index of the medium, formula_14 is Avogadro's number, and formula_15 is the spectral overlap integral calculated as\nwhere formula_17 is the donor emission spectrum, formula_18 is the donor emission spectrum normalized to an area of 1, and formula_19 is the acceptor molar extinction coefficient normally obtained from an absorption spectrum.\nThe orientation factor \"κ\" is given by\nwhere formula_21 denotes the normalized transition dipole moment of the respective fluorophore, and formula_22 denotes the normalized inter-fluorophore displacement.\nformula_12 = 2/3 is often assumed. This value is obtained when both dyes are freely rotating and can be considered to be isotropically oriented during the excited state lifetime. If either dye is fixed or not free to rotate, then formula_12 = 2/3 will not be a valid assumption. In most cases, however, even modest reorientation of the dyes results in enough orientational averaging that formula_12 = 2/3 does not result in a large error in the estimated energy transfer distance due to the sixth-power dependence of formula_9 on formula_12. Even when formula_12 is quite different from 2/3, the error can be associated with a shift in formula_9, and thus determinations of changes in relative distance for a particular system are still valid. Fluorescent proteins do not reorient on a timescale that is faster than their fluorescence lifetime. In this case 0 ≤ formula_12 ≤ 4.\n\nThe FRET efficiency relates to the quantum yield and the fluorescence lifetime of the donor molecule as follows:\nwhere formula_32 and formula_33 are the donor fluorescence lifetimes in the presence and absence of an acceptor respectively, or as\nwhere formula_35 and formula_36 are the donor fluorescence intensities with and without an acceptor respectively.\n\nThe inverse sixth-power distance dependence of Förster resonance energy transfer was experimentally confirmed by Wilchek, Edelhoch and Brand using tryptophyl peptides. Stryer, Haugland and Yguerabide also experimentally demonstrated the theoretical dependence of Förster resonance energy transfer on the overlap integral by using a fused indolosteroid as a donor and a ketone as an acceptor. However, a lot of contradictions of special experiments with the theory was observed. The reason is that the theory has approximate character and gives overestimated distances of 50–100 ångströms.\n\nIn fluorescence microscopy, fluorescence confocal laser scanning microscopy, as well as in molecular biology, FRET is a useful tool to quantify molecular dynamics in biophysics and biochemistry, such as protein-protein interactions, protein–DNA interactions, and protein conformational changes. For monitoring the complex formation between two molecules, one of them is labeled with a donor and the other with an acceptor. The FRET efficiency is measured and used to identify interactions between the labeled complexes. There are several ways of measuring the FRET efficiency by monitoring changes in the fluorescence emitted by the donor or the acceptor.\n\nOne method of measuring FRET efficiency is to measure the variation in acceptor emission intensity. When the donor and acceptor are in proximity (1–10 nm) due to the interaction of the two molecules, the acceptor emission will increase because of the intermolecular FRET from the donor to the acceptor. For monitoring protein conformational changes, the target protein is labeled with a donor and an acceptor at two loci. When a twist or bend of the protein brings the change in the distance or relative orientation of the donor and acceptor, FRET change is observed. If a molecular interaction or a protein conformational change is dependent on ligand binding, this FRET technique is applicable to fluorescent indicators for the ligand detection.\n\nFRET efficiencies can also be inferred from the photobleaching rates of the donor in the presence and absence of an acceptor. This method can be performed on most fluorescence microscopes; one simply shines the excitation light (of a frequency that will excite the donor but not the acceptor significantly) on specimens with and without the acceptor fluorophore and monitors the donor fluorescence (typically separated from acceptor fluorescence using a bandpass filter) over time. The timescale is that of photobleaching, which is seconds to minutes, with fluorescence in each curve being given by\n\nwhere formula_38 is the photobleaching decay time constant and depends on whether the acceptor is present or not. Since photobleaching consists in the permanent inactivation of excited fluorophores, resonance energy transfer from an excited donor to an acceptor fluorophore prevents the photobleaching of that donor fluorophore, and thus high FRET efficiency leads to a longer photobleaching decay time constant:\n\nwhere formula_40 and formula_38 are the photobleaching decay time constants of the donor in the presence and in the absence of the acceptor respectively. (Notice that the fraction is the reciprocal of that used for lifetime measurements).\n\nThis technique was introduced by Jovin in 1989. Its use of an entire curve of points to extract the time constants can give it accuracy advantages over the other methods. Also, the fact that time measurements are over seconds rather than nanoseconds makes it easier than fluorescence lifetime measurements, and because photobleaching decay rates do not generally depend on donor concentration (unless acceptor saturation is an issue), the careful control of concentrations needed for intensity measurements is not needed. It is, however, important to keep the illumination the same for the with- and without-acceptor measurements, as photobleaching increases markedly with more intense incident light.\n\nFRET efficiency can also be determined from the change in the fluorescence lifetime of the donor. The lifetime of the donor will decrease in the presence of the acceptor. Lifetime measurements of FRET are used in fluorescence-lifetime imaging microscopy.\n\nOne common pair fluorophores for biological use is a cyan fluorescent protein (CFP) – yellow fluorescent protein (YFP) pair. Both are color variants of green fluorescent protein (GFP). Labeling with organic fluorescent dyes requires purification, chemical modification, and intracellular injection of a host protein. GFP variants can be attached to a host protein by genetic engineering which can be more convenient. Additionally, a fusion of CFP and YFP linked by a protease cleavage sequence can be used as a cleavage assay.\n\nA limitation of FRET is the requirement for external illumination to initiate the fluorescence transfer, which can lead to background noise in the results from direct excitation of the acceptor or to photobleaching. To avoid this drawback, bioluminescence resonance energy transfer (or BRET) has been developed. This technique uses a bioluminescent luciferase (typically the luciferase from \"Renilla reniformis\") rather than CFP to produce an initial photon emission compatible with YFP. One drawback of BRET is the requirement to generate at least one fusion protein encoding luciferase, though some applications of FRET can be implemented with antibody-conjugated fluorophores.\n\nBRET has also been implemented using a different luciferase enzyme, engineered from the deep-sea shrimp \"Oplophorus gracilirostris\". This luciferase is smaller (19 kD) and brighter than the more commonly used luciferase from \"Renilla reniformis\". Promega has developed this luciferase variant under the product name NanoLuc.\n\nIn general, \"FRET\" refers to situations where the donor and acceptor proteins (or \"fluorophores\") are of two different types. In many biological situations, however, researchers might need to examine the interactions between two, or more, proteins of the same type—or indeed the same protein with itself, for example if the protein folds or forms part of a polymer chain of proteins or for other questions of quantification in biological cells.\n\nObviously, spectral differences will not be the tool used to detect and measure FRET, as both the acceptor and donor protein emit light with the same wavelengths. Yet researchers can detect differences in the polarisation between the light which excites the fluorophores and the light which is emitted, in a technique called FRET anisotropy imaging; the level of quantified anisotropy (difference in polarisation between the excitation and emission beams) then becomes an indicative guide to how many FRET events have happened.\n\nFRET has been used to measure distance and detect molecular interactions in a number of systems and has applications in biology and chemistry. FRET can be used to measure distances between domains in a single protein and therefore to provide information about protein conformation. FRET can also detect interaction between proteins. Applied in vivo, FRET has been used to detect the location and interactions of genes and cellular structures including intergrins and membrane proteins. FRET can be used to obtain information about metabolic or signaling pathways. FRET is also used to study lipid rafts in cell membranes.\n\nFRET and BRET are also the common tools in the study of biochemical reaction kinetics and molecular motors.\n\nThe applications of fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) have expanded tremendously in the last 25 years, and the technique has become a staple technique in many biological and biophysical fields. FRET can be used as spectroscopic ruler in various areas such as structural elucidation of biological molecules and their interactions in vitro assays, in vivo monitoring in cellular research, nucleic acid analysis, signal transduction, light harvesting and metallic nanomaterial etc. Based on the mechanism of FRET a variety of novel chemical sensors and biosensors have been developed.\n\nA different, but related, mechanism is Dexter electron transfer.\n\nAn alternative method to detecting protein–protein proximity is the bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BiFC), where two parts of a fluorescent protein are each fused to other proteins. When these two parts meet, they form a fluorophore on a timescale of minutes or hours.\n\n", "id": "1079466", "title": "Förster resonance energy transfer"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10218359", "text": "Inhibitor of apoptosis\n\nApoptosis, or programmed cell death, is a highly regulated process used by many multicellular organisms. Like any regulated process, apoptosis is subject to either activation or inhibition by a variety of chemical factors. Apoptosis can be triggered through two main pathways; extrinsic and intrinsic. The extrinsic pathway mostly involves extracellular signals triggering intracellular apoptosis mechanisms by binding to receptors in the cell membrane and sending signals from the outside of the cell. Intrinsic pathways involved internal cell signaling primarily through the mitochondria. Inhibitors of apoptosis are a group of proteins that mainly act on the intrinsic pathway that block programmed cell death, which can frequently lead to cancer or other effects for the cell if mutated or improperly regulated. Many of these inhibitors act to block caspases, a family of cysteine proteases that play an integral role in apoptosis. Some of these inhibitors include the Bcl-2 family, viral inhibitor crmA, and IAP's.\n\nThe Bcl-2 family of proteins can either inhibit or promote apoptosis and members are characterized by the Bcl-2 homologous domains BH1, BH2, BH3, and BH4. The combinations of the domains in the proteins determine its role in the apoptosis process. Members of the family that inhibit apoptosis include Bcl-2 itself, Bcl-XL, and Bcl-w, which possess all four of the domains. Bcl-2 is the most well known of the anti-apoptotic members, and is classified as an oncogene. Studies have shown that the Bcl-2 oncogene may inhibit apoptosis in two ways; either by directly controlling the activation of caspases, or by disrupting the channels that allow proapoptotic factors from leaving the mitochondria.\n\nRegarding the activation of caspases, there exists a gene called \"ced-9\" in \"C. elegans\" that protects against cell death that is a part of the Bcl-2 family. \"ced-9\" encodes a protein that is structurally similar to Bcl-2 that binds to another protein \"ced-4\", a homolog of APAF-1 in humans, and prevents it from activating caspase \"ced-3\", which is necessary for killing of the cell. In humans APAF-1 actually doesn't interact with Bcl-2; rather it is activated by cytochrome c, the release of which from the mitochondria is regulated by Bcl-2. BAX and BAK are multidomain proapoptoic members of the Bcl-2 family that lie in the cytosol and the mitochondria, respectively. After several stimuli leading to cell death are activated, BAX also moves to the mitochondria where it carries out its functions there. Bcl-2 and Bcl-xl have been found to sequester BH3 domain molecules in the mitochondria, which prevents the activation of BAX and BAK.\n\ncrmA, or cytokine response modifier A, is a cowpox serpin that inhibits caspases 1, 6 and 8, forming complexes with these caspases that renders them unable to perform their apoptotic functions. Cowpox is a orthopox virus that increases their chances of survival and infection by inhibition of specific caspases and preventing inflammatory responses and apoptosis. \nSerpins generally inhibit serine proteases by a suicide substrate inhibition mechanism, in which the serpin undergoes a drastic change in structure to form a acyl enzyme intermediate. A reactive center loop of the protease is bound to the central beta loop of the serpin, trapping the protease in a state where it is no longer able to perform its catalytic functions. Studies have shown crmA uses a method analogous to serpin inhibition of serine proteases to inhibit cysteine protease caspases.\n\nThe Inhibitors of apoptosis proteins (IAP) are a family of functionally and structurally related proteins that serve as endogenous inhibitors of programmed cell death (apoptosis). A common feature of all IAPs is the presence of a BIR (Baculovirus IAP Repeat, a ~70 amino acid domain) in one to three copies. The human IAP family consists of 8 members, and IAP homologs have been identified in numerous organisms.\n\nThe first members of the IAPs identified were from the baculovirus IAPs, Cp-IAP and Op-IAP, which bind to and inhibit caspases as a mechanism that contributes to its efficient infection and replication cycle in the host. Later, five more human IAPs were discovered which included XIAP, cIAP1 , C-IAP2, NAIP, Livin and Survivin.\n\nThe best characterized IAP is XIAP, which binds caspase-9, caspase-3 and caspase-7, thereby inhibiting their activation and preventing apoptosis. Also cIAP1 and cIAP2 have been shown to bind caspases, although how the IAPs inhibit apoptosis mechanistically at the molecular level is not completely understood.\n\nActivity of XIAP is blocked by binding to DIABLO (Smac) and HTRA2 (Omi) proteins released from mitochondria after proapoptotic stimuli.\n\nSince the mid 2000s, significant progress has been made into the development of small molecule mimics of the endogenous IAP ligand Smac. One recent example published in 2013 describes the synthesis and testing of peptidomimetics whose structure is based on the AVPI tetrapeptide IAP binding motif present in the N-terminus of mature Smac. These peptidomimetic compounds were specifically noted for their exceptionally high level of binding to Livin, one of the important IAP family members yet to receive much attention from a drug discovery perspective.\n\n\n", "id": "10218359", "title": "Inhibitor of apoptosis"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21975254", "text": "L-form bacteria\n\nL-form bacteria, also known as Sam Cannon, L-phase variants, and cell wall-deficient (CWD) bacteria, are strains of bacteria that lack cell walls. They were first isolated in 1935 by Emmy Klieneberger-Nobel, who named them \"L-forms\" after the Lister Institute in London where she was working.\n\nTwo types of L-forms are distinguished: \"unstable L-forms\", spheroplasts that are capable of dividing, but can revert to the original morphology, and \"stable L-forms\", L-forms that are unable to revert to the original bacteria.\n\nSome parasitic species of bacteria, such as mycoplasma, also lack a cell wall, but these are not considered L-forms since they are not derived from bacteria that normally have cell walls.\n\nBacterial morphology is determined by the cell wall. Since the L-form has no cell wall, its morphology is different from that of the strain of bacteria from which it is derived. Typical L-form cells are spheres or spheroids. For example, L-forms of the rod-shaped bacterium \"Bacillus subtilis\" appear round when viewed by phase contrast microscopy or by transmission electron microscopy.\n\nAlthough L-forms can develop from Gram-positive as well as from Gram-negative bacteria, in a Gram stain test, the L-forms always colour Gram-negative, due to the lack of a cell wall.\n\nThe cell wall is important for cell division, which, in most bacteria, occurs by binary fission. This process usually requires a cell wall and components of the bacterial cytoskeleton such as FtsZ. The ability of L-form bacteria to grow and divide in the absence of both of these structures is highly unusual, and may represent a form of cell division that was important in early forms of life. This novel mode of division seems to involve the extension of thin protrusions from the cell's surface and these protrusions then pinching off to form new cells. The lack of cell wall in L-forms means that division is disorganised, giving rise to a variety of cell sizes, from very tiny to very big.\n\nL-forms can be generated in the laboratory from many bacterial species that usually have cell walls, such as \"Bacillus subtilis\" or \"Escherichia coli\". This is done by inhibiting peptidoglycan synthesis with antibiotics or treating the cells with lysozyme, an enzyme that digests cell walls. The L-forms are generated in a culture medium that is the same osmolarity as the bacterial cytosol (an isotonic solution), which prevents cell lysis by osmotic shock. L-form strains can be unstable, tending to revert to the normal form of the bacteria by regrowing a cell wall, but this can be prevented by long-term culture of the cells under the same conditions that were used to produce them.\n\nSome studies have identified mutations that occur, as these strains are derived from normal bacteria. One such point mutation is in an enzyme involved in the mevalonate pathway of lipid metabolism that increased the frequency of L-form formation 1,000-fold. The reason for this effect is not known, but it is presumed that the increase is related to this enzyme's role in making a lipid important in peptidoglycan synthesis.\n\nAnother methodology of induction relies on nanotechnology and landscape ecology. Microfluidics devices can be built in order to challenge peptidoglycan synthesis by extreme spatial confinement. After biological dispersal through a constricted (sub-micrometre scale) biological corridor connecting adjacent micro habitat patches, L-form-like cells can be derived using a microfluifics-based (synthetic) ecosystem implementing an adaptive landscape selecting for shape-shifting phenotypes similar to L-forms.\n\nSome publications have suggested that L-form bacteria might cause diseases in humans, and other animals but, as the evidence that links these organisms to disease is fragmentary and frequently contradictory, this hypothesis remains controversial. The two extreme viewpoints on this question are that L-form bacteria are either laboratory curiosities of no clinical significance or important but unappreciated causes of disease. Research on L-form bacteria is continuing. For example, L-form organisms have been observed in mouse lungs after experimental inoculation with \"Nocardia caviae\", and a recent study suggested that these organisms may infect immunosuppressed patients having undergone bone marrow transplants. The formation of strains of bacteria lacking cell walls has also been proposed to be important in the acquisition of bacterial antibiotic resistance.\n\nL-form bacteria may be useful in research on early forms of life, and in biotechnology. These strains are being examined for possible uses in biotechnology as host strains for recombinant protein production. Here, the absence of a cell wall can allow production of large amounts of secreted proteins that would otherwise accumulate in the periplasmic space of bacteria.\n\n\n\n", "id": "21975254", "title": "L-form bacteria"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1492704", "text": "Centrolecithal\n\nCentrolecithal (\"Greek\" kentron = center of a circle, lekithos = yolk) describes the placement of the yolk in the centre of the cytoplasm of ovums. Many arthropod eggs are centrolecithal.\n\nDuring cytokinesis, centrolecithal zygotes undergo meroblastic cleavage, where the cleavage plane extends only to the accumulated yolk and is superficial. This is due to the large dense yolk found within centrolecithal eggs and triggers a delayed embryonic development.\n\n", "id": "1492704", "title": "Centrolecithal"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=164901", "text": "Post-translational modification\n\nPost-translational modification (PTM) refers to the covalent and generally enzymatic modification of proteins following protein biosynthesis. Proteins are synthesized by ribosomes translating mRNA into polypeptide chains, which may then undergo PTM to form the mature protein product. PTMs are important components in cell signaling.\n\nPost-translational modifications can occur on the amino acid side chains or at the protein's C- or N- termini. They can extend the chemical repertoire of the 20 standard amino acids by modifying an existing functional group or introducing a new one such as phosphate. Phosphorylation is a very common mechanism for regulating the activity of enzymes and is the most common post-translational modification. Many eukaryotic proteins also have carbohydrate molecules attached to them in a process called glycosylation, which can promote protein folding and improve stability as well as serving regulatory functions. Attachment of lipid molecules, known as lipidation, often targets a protein or part of a protein attached to the cell membrane.\n\nOther forms of post-translational modification consist of cleaving peptide bonds, as in processing a propeptide to a mature form or removing the initiator methionine residue. The formation of disulfide bonds from cysteine residues may also be referred to as a post-translational modification. For instance, the peptide hormone insulin is cut twice after disulfide bonds are formed, and a propeptide is removed from the middle of the chain; the resulting protein consists of two polypeptide chains connected by disulfide bonds.\n\nSome types of post-translational modification are consequences of oxidative stress. Carbonylation is one example that targets the modified protein for degradation and can result in the formation of protein aggregates. Specific amino acid modifications can be used as biomarkers indicating oxidative damage.\n\nSites that often undergo post-translational modification are those that have a functional group that can serve as a nucleophile in the reaction: the hydroxyl groups of serine, threonine, and tyrosine; the amine forms of lysine, arginine, and histidine; the thiolate anion of cysteine; the carboxylates of aspartate and glutamate; and the N- and C-termini. In addition, although the amide of asparagine is a weak nucleophile, it can serve as an attachment point for glycans. Rarer modifications can occur at oxidized methionines and at some methylenes in side chains.\n\nPost-translational modification of proteins can be experimentally detected by a variety of techniques, including mass spectrometry, Eastern blotting, and Western blotting. Additional methods are provided in the external links sections.\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\nIn 2011, statistics of each post-translational modification experimentally and putatively detected have been compiled using proteome-wide information from the Swiss-Prot database. The 10 most common experimentally found modifications were as follows:\n\nMore details can be found at http://selene.princeton.edu/PTMCuration/.\n\nSome common post-translational modifications to specific amino-acid residues are shown below. Modifications occur on the side-chain unless indicated otherwise.\n\n\n\n", "id": "164901", "title": "Post-translational modification"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30739972", "text": "Microcell-mediated chromosome transfer\n\nMicrocell Mediated Chromosome Transfer (or MMCT) is a technique used in cell biology and genetics to transfer a chromosome from a defined donor cell line into a recipient cell line. MMCT has been in use since the 1970s and has contributed to a multitude of discoveries including tumor, metastasis and telomerase suppressor genes as well as information about epigenetics, x-inactivation, mitochondrial function and aneuploidy. MMCT follows the basic procedure where donor cells (i.e. cells providing one or more chromosomes or fragments to a recipient cell) are induced to multinucleate their chromosomes. These nuclei are then forced through the cell membrane to create microcells, which can be fused to a recipient cell line.\n\nThe term MMCT was first used by Fournier and Ruddle in 1977. Their method was based on previous work from 1974 by Ege, Ringertz, Veomett and colleagues, synthesizing the techniques used at the time to induce multinucleation in cells, nuclear removal and cell-cell fusions. The next major step in MMCT came during the 1980s when new transfection techniques were utilized to introduce selectable markers onto chromosomes thus making it possible to select for the introduction of specific chromosomes and more easily create defined hybrids.\n\nProcedures for MMCT differ slightly but they all require: the induction of multinucleation, enucleation (nuclear removal), and fusion. Multinucleation is usually accomplished through causing prolonged mitotic arrest by colcemid treatment. Certain cells will then \"slip\" out of mitosis and form multiple nuclei. These nuclei can then be removed using cytochalasin B to disrupt the cytoskeleton and centrifugation in a density gradient to force enucleation. The newly created microcells can then be fused to recipient (target) cells by exposure to poly ethylene glycol, use of Sendai virus, or electrofusion.\n\nVariations now allow construction of \"humanized\" mice with large pieces from human chromosomes as well as new methods for human and mouse artificial chromosomes.\n", "id": "30739972", "title": "Microcell-mediated chromosome transfer"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1989166", "text": "Phagosome\n\nIn cell biology, a phagosome is a vesicle formed around a particle engulfed by a phagocyte via phagocytosis. Professional phagocytes include macrophages, neutrophils, and dendritic cells (DCs). A phagosome is formed by the fusion of the cell membrane around a microorganism or senescent cell. Phagosomes have membrane-bound proteins to recruit and fuse with lysosomes to form mature phagolysosomes. The lysosomes contain hydrolytic enzymes and reactive oxygen species (ROS) which kill and digest the pathogens. Phagosomes can also form in non-professional phagocytes, but they can only engulf a smaller range of particles, and do not contain ROS. The useful materials (e.g. amino acids) from the digested particles are moved into the cytosol, and waste is removed by exocytosis. Phagosome formation is crucial for tissue homeostasis and both innate and adaptive host defense against pathogens.\n\nHowever, some bacteria can exploit phagocytosis as an invasion strategy. They either reproduce inside of the phagolysosome \"(e.g. Coxiella\" spp.) or escape into the cytoplasm before the phagosome fuses with the lysosome (e.g. \"Rickettsia\" spp.).\nMany Mycobacteria, including \"Mycobacterium tuberculosis\" \n\nand \"Mycobacterium avium paratuberculosis\"\n, can manipulate the host macrophage to prevent lysosomes from fusing with phagosomes and creating mature phagolysosomes. Such incomplete maturation of the phagosome maintains an environment favorable to the pathogens inside it\n\nPhagosomes are large enough to degrade whole bacteria, or apoptotic and senescent cells, which are usually >0.5μm in diameter. This means a phagosome is several orders of magnitude bigger than an endosome, which is measured in nanometres.\n\nPhagosomes are formed when pathogens or opsonins bind to a transmembrane receptor, which are randomly distributed on the phagocyte cell surface. Upon binding, \"outside-in\" signalling triggers actin polymerisation and pseudopodia formation, which surrounds and fuses behind the microorganism. Protein kinase C, phosphoinositide 3-kinase, and phospholipase C (PLC) are all needed for signalling and controlling particle internalisation. More cell surface receptors can bind to the particle in a zipper-like mechanism as the pathogen is surrounded, increasing the binding avidity. Fc receptor (FcR), complement receptors (CR), mannose receptor and Dectin-1 are phagocytic receptors, which means that they can induce phagocytosis if they are expressed in non-phagocytic cells such as fibroblasts. Other proteins such as Toll-like receptors are involved in pathogen pattern recognition and are often recruited to phagosomes but do not specifically trigger phagocytosis in non-phagocytic cells, so they are not considered phagocytic receptors.\n\nOpsonins are molecular tags such as antibodies and complements that attach to pathogens and up-regulate phagocytosis. Immunoglobulin G (IgG) is the major type of antibody present in the serum. It is part of the adaptive immune system, but it links to the innate response by recruiting macrophages to phagocytose pathogens. The antibody binds to microbes with the variable Fab domain, and the Fc domain binds to Fc receptors (FcR) to induce phagocytosis.\n\nComplement-mediated internalisation has much less significant membrane protrusions, but the downstream signalling of both pathways converge to activate Rho GTPases. They control actin polymerisation which is required for the phagosome to fuse with endosomes and lysosomes.\n\nOther non-professional phagocytes have some degree of phagocytic activity, such as thyroid and bladder epithelial cells that can engulf erythrocytes and retinal epithelial cells that internalise retinal rods. However non-professional phagocytes do not express specific phagocytic receptors such as FcR and have a much lower rate of internalisation.\n\nSome invasive bacteria can also induce phagocytosis in non-phagocytic cells to mediate host uptake. For example, \"Shigella\" can secrete toxins that alter the host cytoskeleton and enter the basolateral side of enterocytes.\n\nAs the membrane of the phagosome is formed by the fusion of the plasma membrane, the basic composition of the phospholipid bilayer is the same. Endosomes and lysosomes then fuse with the phagosome to contribute to the membrane, especially when the engulfed particle is very big, such as a parasite. They also deliver various membrane proteins to the phagosome and modify the organelle structure.\n\nPhagosomes can engulf artificial low-density latex beads and then purified along a sucrose concentration gradient, allowing the structure and composition to be studied. By purifying phagosomes at different time points, the maturation process can also be characterised. Early phagosomes are characterised by Rab5, which transition into Rab7 as the vesicle matures into late phagosomes.\n\nThe nascent phagosome is not inherently bactericidal. As it matures, it becomes more acidic from pH 6.5 to pH 4, and gains characteristic protein markers and hydrolytic enzymes. The different enzymes function at various optimal pH, forming a range so they each work in narrow stages of the maturation process. Enzyme activity can be fine-tuned by modifying the pH level, allowing for greater flexibility. The phagosome moves along microtubules of the cytoskeleton, fusing with endosomes and lysosomes sequentially in a dynamic \"kiss-and-run\" manner. This intracellular transport depends on the size of the phagosomes. Larger organelles (with a diameter of about 3 µm) are transported very persistently from the cell periphery towards the perinuclear region whereas smaller organelles (with a diameter of about 1 µm) are transported more bidirectionally back and forth between cell center and cell periphery. Vacuolar proton pumps (v-ATPase) are delivered to the phagosome to acidify the organelle compartment, creating a more hostile environment for pathogens and facilitating protein degradation. The bacterial proteins are denatured in low pH and become more accessible to the proteases, which are unaffected by the acidic environment. The enzymes are later recycled from the phagolysosome before egestion so they are not wasted. The composition of the phospholipid membrane also changes as the phagosome matures.\n\nFusion may take minutes to hours depending on the contents of the phagosome; FcR or mannose receptor-mediated fusion last less than 30 minutes, but phagosomes containing latex beads may take several hours to fuse with lysosomes. It is suggested that the composition of the phagosome membrane affects the rate of maturation. \"Mycobacterium tuberculosis\" has a very hydrophobic cell wall, which is hypothesised to prevent membrane recycling and recruitment of fusion factors, so the phagosome does not fuse with lysosomes and the bacterium avoids degradation.\n\nSmaller lumenal molecules are transferred by fusion faster than larger molecules, which suggests that a small aqueous channel forms between the phagosome and other vesicles during \"kiss-and-run\", through which only limited exchange is allowed.\n\nShortly after internalisation, F-actin depolymerises from the newly formed phagosome so it becomes accessible to endosomes for fusion and delivery of proteins. The maturation process is divided into early and late stages depending on characteristic protein markers, regulated by small Rab GTPases. Rab5 is present on early phagosomes, and controls the transition to late phagosomes marked by Rab7.\n\nRab5 recruits PI-3 kinase and other tethering proteins such as Vps34 to the phagosome membrane, so endosomes can deliver proteins to the phagosome. Rab5 is partially involved in the transition to Rab7, via the CORVET complex and the HOPS complex in yeast. The exact maturation pathway in mammals is not well understood, but it is suggested that HOPS can bind Rab7 and displace the guanosine nucleotide dissociation inhibitor (GDI). Rab11 is involved in membrane recycling.\n\nThe phagosome fuses with lysosomes to form a phagolysosome, which has various bactericidal properties. The phagolysosome contains reactive oxygen and nitrogen species (ROS and RNS) and hydrolytic enzymes. The compartment is also acidic due to proton pumps (v-ATPases) that transport H across the membrane, used to denature the bacterial proteins.\n\nThe exact properties of phagolysosomes vary depending on the type of phagocyte. Those in dendritic cells have weaker bactericidal properties than those in macrophages and neutrophils. Also, macrophages are divided into pro-inflammatory \"killer\" M1 and \"repair\" M2. The phagolysosomes of M1 can metabolise arginine into highly reactive nitric oxide, while M2 use arginine to produce ornithine to promote cell proliferation and tissue repair.\n\nMacrophages and neutrophils are professional phagocytes in charge of most of the pathogen degradation, but they have different bactericidal methods. Neutrophils have granules that fuse with the phagosome. The granules contain NADPH oxidase and myeloperoxidase, which produce toxic oxygen and chlorine derivatives to kill pathogens in an oxidative burst. Proteases and anti-microbial peptides are also released into the phagolysosome. Macrophages lack granules, and rely more on phagolysosome acidification, glycosidases, and proteases to digest microbes. Phagosomes in dendritic cells are less acidic and have much weaker hydrolytic activity, due to a lower concentration of lysosomal proteases and even the presence of protease inhibitors.\n\nPhagosome formation is tied to inflammation via common signalling molecules. PI-3 kinase and PLC are involved in both the internalisation mechanism and triggering inflammation. The two proteins, along with Rho GTPases, are important components of the innate immune response, inducing cytokine production and activating the MAP kinase signalling cascade. Pro-inflammatory cytokines including IL-1β, IL-6, TNFα, and IL-12 are all produced.\n\nThe process is tightly regulated and the inflammatory response varies depending on the particle type within the phagosome. Pathogen-infected apoptotic cells will trigger inflammation, but damaged cells that are degraded as part of the normal tissue turnover do not. The response also differs according to the opsonin-mediated phagocytosis. FcR and mannose receptor-mediated reactions produce pro-inflammatory reactive oxygen species and arachidonic acid molecules, but CR-mediated reactions do not result in those products.\n\nImmature dendritic cells (DCs) can phagocytose, but mature DCs cannot due to changes in Rho GTPases involved in cytoskeleton remodelling. The phagosomes of DCs are less hydrolytic and acidic than those of macrophages and neutrophils, as DCs are mainly involved in antigen presentation rather than pathogen degradation. They need to retain protein fragments of a suitable size for specific bacterial recognition, so the peptides are only partially degraded. Peptides from the bacteria are trafficked to the Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC). The peptide antigens are presented to lymphocytes, where they bind to T-cell receptors and activates T-cells, bridging the gap between innate and adaptive immunity. This is specific to mammals, birds, and jawed fish, as insects do not have adaptive immunity.\n\nAncient single-celled organisms such as amoeba use phagocytosis as a way to acquire nutrients, rather than an immune strategy. They engulf other smaller microbes and digest them within the phagosome of around one bacterium per minute, which is much faster than professional phagocytes. For the soil amoeba \"Dictyostelium discoideum\", their main food source is the bacteria \"Legionella pneumophila\", which causes Legionnaire's disease in humans. Phagosome maturation in amoeba is very similar to that in macrophages, so they are used as a model organism to study the process.\n\nPhagosomes degrade senescent cells and apoptotic cells to maintain tissue homeostasis. Erythrocytes have one of the highest turnover rates in the body, and they are phagocytosed by macrophages in the liver and spleen. In the embryo, the process of removing dead cells is not well-characterised, but it is not performed by macrophages or other cells derived from hematopoietic stem cells. It is only in the adult that apoptotic cells are phagocytosed by professional phagocytes. Inflammation is only triggered by certain pathogen- or damage-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs or DAMPs), the removal of senescent cells is non-inflammatory.\n\nAutophagosomes are different from phagosomes in that they are mainly used to selectively degrade damaged cytosolic organelles such as mitochondria (mitophagy). However, when the cell is starved or stressed, autophagosomes can also non-selectively degrade organelles to provide the cell with amino acids and other nutrients. Autophagy is not limited to professional phagocytes, it is first discovered in rat hepatocytes by cell biologist Christian de Duve. Autophagosomes have a double membrane, the inner one from the engulfed organelle, and the outer membrane is speculated to be formed from the endoplasmic reticulum or the ER-Golgi Intermediate Compartment (ERGIC). The autophagosome also fuses with lysosomes to degrade its contents. When \"M. tuberculosis\" inhibit phagosome acidification, Interferon gamma can induce autophagy and rescue the maturation process.\n\nMany bacteria have evolved to evade the bactericidal properties of phagosomes or even exploit phagocytosis as an invasion strategy.\n\n\n\n<br>\n", "id": "1989166", "title": "Phagosome"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=974030", "text": "Extracellular\n\nIn cell biology, molecular biology and related fields, the word extracellular (or sometimes extracellular space) means \"outside the cell\". This space is usually taken to be outside the plasma membranes, and occupied by fluid (see extracellular matrix). The term is used in contrast to intracellular (inside the cell).\n\nAccording to the gene ontology database the extracellular space is a cellular component defined as: \"That part of a multicellular organism outside the cells proper, usually taken to be outside the plasma membranes, and occupied by fluid. For multicellular organisms, the extracellular space refers to everything outside a cell, but still within the organism (excluding the extracellular matrix). Gene products from a multi-cellular organism that are secreted from a cell into the interstitial fluid or blood can therefore be annotated to this term\".\n\nThe composition of the extracellular space includes metabolites, ions, various proteins and non-protein substances (e.g. DNA, RNA, lipids, microbial products etc.) that might affect cellular function. For example, hormones, growth factors, cytokines and chemokines act by travelling the extracellular space towards biochemical receptors on cells. Other proteins that are active outside the cell are various enzymes, including digestive enzymes (Trypsin, Pepsin), extracellular proteinases (Matrix metalloproteinases, ADAMTSs, Cathepsins) and antioxidant enzymes (extracellular superoxide dismutase). Often, proteins present in the extracellular space are stored outside the cells by attaching to various extracellular matrix components (Collagens, Proteoglycans, etc.). In addition, extracellular matrix proteolytic products are also present in the extracellular space, especially in tissues undergoing remodelling [2].\n", "id": "974030", "title": "Extracellular"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31529144", "text": "Hyperhydricity\n\nHyperhydricity (previously known as vitrification) is a physiological malformation that results in excessive hydration, low lignification, impaired stomatal function and reduced mechanical strength of tissue culture-generated plants. The consequence is poor regeneration of such plants without intensive greenhouse acclimation for outdoor growth. Additionally, it may also lead to leaf-tip and bud necrosis in some cases, which often leads to loss of apical dominance in the shoots. In general, the main symptom of hyperhydricity is translucent characteristics signified by a shortage of chlorophyll and high water content. Specifically, the presence of a thin or absent cuticular layer, reduced number of palisade cells, irregular stomata, less developed cell wall and large intracellular spaces in the mesophyll cell layer have been described as some of the anatomic changes associated with hyperhydricity.\n\nThe main causes of hyperhydricity in plant tissue culture are those factors triggering oxidative stresses such as high salt concentration, high relative humidity, low light intensity, gas accumulation in the atmosphere of the jar, length of time intervals between subcultures; number of subcultures, concentration and type of gelling agent, the type of explants used, the concentrations of microelement and hormonal imbalances. Hyperhydricity is commonly apparent in liquid culture-grown plants or when there is low concentration of gelling agent. High ammonium concentration also contributes to hyperhydricity.\n\nHyperhydricity can be monitored by modifying the atmosphere of the culture vessels. Adjusting the relative humidity in the vessel is one of the most important parameters to be controlled. Use of gas-permeable membranes may help in this regard as this allows increased exchange of water vapor and other gases such as ethylene with the surrounding environment. Using higher concentration of a gelling agent, on top of the use of a higher-strength gelling agent may reduce the risk from hyperhydricity. Hyperhydricity can also be controlled by bottom cooling, which allows water to condense on the medium, the use of cytokinin-meta-topolin (6-(3-Hydroxybenzylamino)purine)</9>, the combination of lower cytokinin and ammonium nitrate in the medium, use of nitrate or glutamine as the sole nitrogen source and decreasing the ratio of NH4+:NO3- in the medium.\nIn studies on calcium deficiency in tissue cultures of \"Lavandula angustifolia\", it was shown that an increase in calcium in the medium reduced hyperhydricity.\n\n\n", "id": "31529144", "title": "Hyperhydricity"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31678753", "text": "Paracytophagy\n\nParacytophagy () is the cellular process whereby a cell engulfs a protrusion which extends from a neighboring cell. This protrusion may contain material which is actively transferred between the cells. The process of paracytophagy was first described as a crucial step during cell-to-cell spread of the intracellular bacterial pathogen \"Listeria monocytogenes\", and is also commonly observed in \"Shigella flexneri\". Paracytophagy allows these intracellular pathogens to spread directly from cell to cell, thus escaping immune detection and destruction. Studies of this process have contributed significantly to our understanding of the role of the actin cytoskeleton in eukaryotic cells.\n\nActin is one of the main cytoskeletal proteins in eukaryotic cells. The polymerization of actin filaments is responsible for the formation of pseudopods, filopodia and lamellipodia during cell motility. Cells actively build actin microfilaments that push the cell membrane towards the direction of advance.\n\nNucleation factors are enhancers of actin polymerization and contribute to the formation of the trimeric polymerization nucleus. This is a structure required to initiate the process of actin filament polymerization in a stable and efficient way. Nucleation factors such as WASP (Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein) help to form the seven-protein Arp2/3 nucleation complex, which resembles two actin monomers and therefore allows for easier formation of the polymerization nucleus. Arp2/3 is able to cap the trailing (\"minus\") end of the actin filament, allowing for faster polymerization at the \"plus\" end. It can also bind to the side of existing filaments to promote filament branching.\n\nCertain intracellular pathogens such as the bacterial species \"Listeria monocytogenes\" and \"Shigella flexneri\" can manipulate host cell actin polymerization to move through the cytosol and spread to neighboring cells (see below). Studies of these bacteria, especially of \"Listeria\" Actin assembly-inducing protein (ActA), have resulted in further understanding of the actions of WASP. ActA is a nucleation promoting factor that mimics WASP. It is expressed polarized to the posterior end of the bacterium, allowing Arp2/3-mediated actin nucleation. This pushes the bacterium in the anterior direction, leaving a trailing \"comet tail\" of actin. In the case of \"Shigella\", which also moves using an actin comet tail, the bacterial factor recruits host cell WASPs in order to promote actin nucleation.\n\nCells can exchange material through various mechanisms, such as by secreting proteins, releasing exosomes, or more directly engulfing pieces of adjacent cells. In one example, filopodia-like protrusions, or tunneling nanotubes directed toward neighboring cells in a culture of rat PC12 cells have been shown to facilitate transport of organelles through transient membrane fusion. In another example, during bone marrow homing, cells of the surrounding bone engulf pieces of bone marrow hematopoietic cells. These osteoblasts make contact with hematopoietic stem-progenitor cells through membrane nanotubes, and pieces of the donor cells are transferred over time to various endocytic compartments of the target osteoblasts.\n\nA distinct process known as trogocytosis, the exchange of lipid rafts or membrane patches between immune cells, can facilitate response to foreign stimuli. Moreover, exosomes have been shown to deliver not only antigens for cross-presentation, but also MHCII and co-stimulatory molecules for lymphocyte T activation. In non-immune cells, it has been demonstrated that mitochondria can be exchanged intercellularly to rescue metabolically non-viable cells lacking mitochondria. Mitochondrial transfer has also been observed in cancer cells.\n\nArgosomes are derived from basolateral epithelial membranes and allow communication between adjacent cells. They were first described in \"Drosophila melanogaster\", where they act as a vehicle for the spread of molecules through the epithelia of imaginal discs. Melanosomes are also transferred by filopodia from melanocytes to keratinocytes. This transfer involves a classic filopodial forming pathway, with Cdc42 and WASP as key factors.\n\nArgosomes, melanosomes, and other examples of epithelial transfer have been compared with the process of paracytophagy, all of which can be viewed as special cases of intercellular material transfer between epithelial cells.\n\nThe two main examples of paracytophagy are the modes of cell-cell transmission of \"Listeria monocytogenes\" and \"Shigella flexneri\". In the case of \"Listeria\", the process was first described in detail using electron microscopy and video microscopy. The following is a description of the process of cell-cell transmission of \"Listeria monocytogenes\", primarily based on Robbins \"et al\". (1999):\n\nIn an already infected \"donor\" cell, the \"Listeria\" bacterium expresses ActA, which results in formation of the actin comet tail and movement of the bacterium throughout the cytoplasm. When the bacterium encounters the donor cell membrane, it will either ricochet off it or adhere to it and begin to push outwards, distending the membrane and forming a protrusion of 3-18 μm. The close interaction between the bacterium and the host cell membrane is thought to depend on Ezrin, a member of the ERM family of membrane-associated proteins. Ezrin attaches the actin-propelled bacterium to the plasma membrane by crosslinking the actin comet tail to the membrane, and maintains this interaction throughout the protrusion process.\n\nAs the normal site of infection is the gut columnar epithelium, cells are packed closely together and a cell protrusion from one cell will easily push into a neighboring \"target\" cell without rupturing the target cell membrane or the donor protrusion membrane. At this point, the bacterium at the tip of the protrusion will begin to undergo \"fitful movement\" caused by continuing polymerization of actin at its rear. After 7–15 minutes, the donor cell membrane pinches off and fitful movement ceases for 15–25 minutes due to depletion of ATP. Subsequently, the target membrane pinches off (taking 30–150 seconds) and the secondary vacuole containing the bacterium forms inside the target cell cytoplasm.\n\nWithin 5 minutes, the target cell becomes infected when the secondary vacuole begins to acidify and the inner (donor cell-derived) membrane breaks down through the action of bacterial phospholipases (PI-PLC and PC-PLC). Shortly thereafter, the outer membrane breaks down as a result of the actions of the bacterial protein listeriolysin O which punctures the vacuolar membrane. A cloud of residual donor cell-derived actin persists around the bacterium for up to 30 minutes. The bacterial metalloprotease Mpl cleaves ActA in a pH-dependent fashion while the bacterium is still within the acidified secondary vacuole, but new ActA transcription is not required as pre-existing ActA mRNA can be utilized to translate new ActA protein. The bacterium regains motility and the infection proceeds.\n\nThe most severe symptoms of Listeriosis result from involvement of the central nervous system (CNS). These severe and often fatal symptoms include meningitis, rhombencephalitis, and encephalitis. These forms of disease are a direct result of \"Listeria\" pathogenicity mechanisms at the cellular level. Listerial infection involving the CNS can occur via three known routes: through the blood, through intracellular delivery, or through neuronal intracellular spread. Paracytophagous cell to cell spread offers \"Listeria\" access to the CNS by the latter two mechanisms.\n\nIn peripheral tissues, \"Listeria\" can invade cells such as monocytes and dendritic cells from infected endothelial cells via the paracytophagous mode of invasion. Using these phagocytic cells as vectors, \"Listeria\" travels throughout the nerves and reaches tissues usually inaccessible to other bacterial pathogens. Similar to the mechanism seen in HIV, infected leukocytes in the blood cross the blood brain barrier and transport \"Listeria\" into the CNS. Once in the CNS, cell to cell spreading causes associated damage leading to brain encephalitis and bacterial meningitis. \"Listeria\" uses phagocytic leukocytes as a “Trojan Horse” to gain access to a greater range of target cells.\n\nIn one study, mice treated with gentamycin via infusion pump displayed CNS and brain involvement during infection with \"Listeria\", indicating that the population of bacteria responsible for severe pathogenesis resided within cells and was protected from the circulating antibiotic. Macrophages infected with \"Listeria\" pass the infection on to neurons more easily through paracytophagy than through extracellular invasion by free bacteria. The mechanism which specifically targets these infected cells to the CNS is currently not known. This Trojan horse function is also observed and thought to be important in early stages of infection where gut-to-lymph node infection is mediated by infected dendritic cells.\n\nA second mechanism of reaching the brain tissue is achieved through intra-axonal transport. In this mechanism, \"Listeria\" travels along the nerves to the brain, resulting in encephalitis or transverse myelitis. In rats, the dorsal root ganglia can be infected directly by \"Listeria\", and the bacteria can move in retrograde as well as anterograde direction through the nerve cells. The specific mechanisms involved in brain disease are not yet known, but paracytophagy is thought to have some role. Bacteria have not been shown to infect neuronal cells directly in an efficient manner, and the previously described macrophage hand-off is thought to be necessary for this mode of spread.\n\nThe process of paracytophagy is considered distinct from similar but unrelated processes such as phagocytosis and trogocytosis. Some related concepts include:\n\n", "id": "31678753", "title": "Paracytophagy"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31142766", "text": "Victimless Leather\n\nVictimless Leather – a prototype of a stitch-less jacket, grown from cell cultures into a layer of tissue supported by a coat shaped polymer layer.\n\nThis is a sub-project of the Tissue Culture & Art Project where the artists are growing a leather jacket without killing any animals. Growing the victimless leather problematizes the concept of garment by making it semi-living. This artistic grown garment is intended to confront people with the moral implications of wearing parts of dead animals for protective and aesthetic reasons and confronts notions of relationships with manipulated living systems.\n\nThe SymbioticA website explains what it is, \"an artistic laboratory dedicated to the research, learning, critique and hands-on engagement with the life sciences.\". The artists work with tissue, constructing and growing complex organisms that can live outside the body, making the new objects semi-living. Their projects are meant to question life, identity and the relationship between humans and other living beings and environments. They are also interested in the ethics around partial life and the possibilities around this type of technology in the future.\n\nThese are some of the sub-projects that are also part of the TC&A project, in addition to Victimless Leather:\n\nNoArk – NoArk is a collection of cells and tissue from many different organisms, growing together inside a \"vessel\", a reference to Noah's Ark. The project website states that NoArk is \"a tangible as well as symbolic ‘craft’ for observing and understanding a biology that combines the familiar with the other\".\nWorry Dolls – Seven modern versions of the Guatemalan Worry doll were hand-crafted of degradable polymers and surgical sutures and seeded with skin, muscle and bone tissue. The tissue was then allowed to grow inside a bioreactor, replacing the polymers as it degrades, thus creating seven semi-living dolls. \nDisembodied Cuisine – Along with Victimless Leather, this is part of the \"Victimless Utopia\". The idea for this project was to take cells from a frog and grow them into something possible to eat, displaying it next to the still living frog the food came from. This problemetizes the whole meat industry – how we kill animals to eat them. Growing tissue outside of the body of the animal is a way to \"make\" meat while the animal stays healthy and living.\nExtra Ear – ¼ Scale – Using human tissue, a quarter-scale replica of artist Stelarc's ear was grown. The project wanted to confront the cultural perceptions of life now that we are able to manipulate living systems, and also discuss the notions of the wholeness of the body. \nThe Pig Wings Project – This project bases its ideas on xenotransplantation and genetically modifying pigs so their organs can be transplanted to humans. The artists used tissue engineering and stem cell technologies to grow pig bone tissue, forming three different sets of wings. One set shaped as bat wings (\"evil\"), one as bird wings (\"good\") and one as pterosaurs wings (\"neutral\").\n\nAn aim for the \"Victimless Leather\" project is to explore and provoke scientific truths, using conceptual art projects to encourage better understanding of cultural ideas around scientific knowledge. The project website point out how clothing has always been used to protect the fragile skin of humans, but lately have evolved into a fabricated object used as a tool to show one's identity. Based on this, clothing can be explored as a tangible example of the relationship between humans and others, and how humans treat others. As the artists put it: \"This particular project will deconstruct our cultural meaning of clothes as a second skin by materialising it and displaying it as an art object.\"\n\nThe intention to grow artificial leather without killing an animal is meant as a contribution to a cultural discussion between art, science and society. Making this jacket presents a possibility of wearing leather that is not part of a dead animal. The projects are presented in Workshops and exhibitions throughout the world to address ethical questions related to bioscience and technology. The artists want the project to be seen in this cultural context, not a commercial one. Their intention is not to create a consumer product, but to offer a starting point for the cultural discussion points mentioned above. As with most of the TC&A projects the artists are concerned with the relationship between humans and other living systems, both natural and scientific made or manipulated.\n\nThe artists wanted to make a leather-like material using living tissue, and ended up making it in the shape of a stitchless jacket. The artists based the jacket on a biodegradable polymer, coated it with 3T3 mouse cells to form connective tissue and topped it up with human bone cells in order to create a stronger skin layer.\n\nTo create the victimless leather, the team needed an artificial environment where semi-living entities are grown, so it is grown inside a bioreactor that acts as a surrogate body. The bioreactor used in this project was custom made, based on an organ perfusion pump designed by Alexis Carrel and Charles Lindbergh. It has an automatic dripping system which feeds the cells. The artists assumed that when the polymer degraded, an integrated jacket would appear. The resulting jacket was tiny, about 2 inches high and 1,4 inches wide and would just fit a mouse.\n\nTo idealize the \"victimless\" of the jacket, immortalized cell lines or cells that divide and multiply forever once they are removed from an animal or human host forming a renewable resource, have been used in the project. The 3T3 mouse cells all come from a mouse who lived in the 1970s.\n\nThe research and development of “Victimless Leather” has been conducted in SymbioticA: the Art and Science Collaborative Research Laboratory, School of Anatomy and Human Biology at the University of Western Australia and in consultation with Professor Arunasalam Dharmarajan from the School of Anatomy and Human Biology as well as Verigen, a Perth-based company that specializes in tissue engineered cartilage for clinical applications. Western Australia state made the investment in the project through ArtsWa in Association with the Lotteries Commission.\n\nFrom a list of selected TC&A exhibitions.\n\nThe victimless leather was featured in the exhibition “Design and the Elastic Mind” at The Museum of Modern Art in New York City, United States. February 24 – May 12, 2008 The project was scheduled to grow continuously until May 12 when the exhibition ended. There were some problems though, when the leather started expanding too quickly, clogging tubes inside the bioreactor. The exhibition leader therefore decided to unplug the project before the end of the exhibition – in a way, killing it.\n\nBecause the artificial leather is made semi-living, the project might be seen as speculative and provocative to some people – questioning whether it is better to kill semi-living beings rather than living beings. \"One of the most common and somewhat surprising comments we heard was that people were disturbed by our ethics of using living cells to grow living fabric, while the use of leather obtained from animals seems to be accepted without any concern for the well-being of the animals from which the skin has been removed.\" artist Ionat Zurr uttered after showing the jacket to the public on \"The Space Between\" exhibition in Australia.\n\nOron Catts was born in Helsinki, Finland in 1967, and is currently residing in Perth, Australia where he has been employed at the University of Western Australia since 1996. He works as an artistic director of SymbioticA, which he is also co-founder of. He is founder of the Tissue Culture & Art Project. From 2000–2001 he was a Research Fellow at the Tissue Engineering and Organ Fabrication Laboratory at Harvard Medical School. He has also worked with numerous other bio-medical laboratories in several different countries.\n\nIonat Zurr was born in London, UK in 1970, and is currently residing in Perth, Australia. Since 1996 she has been employed at the University of Western Australia, where she also did her PhD titled \"Growing Semi-Living Art\" under the Faculty of Architecture, Landscape and Visual Arts . Zurr specialises in video production and biological and digital imaging. She works as an assistant professor and academic coordinator at SymbioticA and is co-founder of the Tissue Culture & Art Project. From 2000–2001 she was a research fellow at the Tissue Engineering and Organ Fabrication Laboratory at Harvard Medical School.\n\nThe project also focuses on human consumption, highlighting that there are victims on every level of it, and that the boundaries between harm and benefit often are blurred. The French actress Brigitte Bardot strongly opposed hunting of animals for vanity and the commercial purpose of the skin. From an indigenous point of view, the context must be seen different. An Inuit hunts the seal and uses the whole body of the animal as a basic resource for his survival.\n\nSimilar to ethics like this, is the interest for artificial meat production due to reactions against the livestock sector because of health and environmental problems. A 2006 UN Food and Agriculture Organization FAO report pointed out the livestock sector as one of the most significant contributors to the most serious environmental problems like soil degradation and water pollution. And because of methane, it spews out more greenhouse gases into the atmosphere than transportation.\n\n", "id": "31142766", "title": "Victimless Leather"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31999551", "text": "Plithotaxis\n\nPlithotaxis, from the Greek, πλήΘος, denoting crowd, swarm, or throng. In collective cellular migration, plithotaxis is the tendency for each individual cell within a monolayer to migrate along the local orientation of the maximal principal stress, or equivalently, minimal intercellular shear stress. Plithotaxis requires force transmission across many cell-cell junctions and therefore is an emergent property of the cell group.\n\n", "id": "31999551", "title": "Plithotaxis"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32065785", "text": "Diauxic growth\n\nDiauxic growth or diauxie is any cell growth characterized by cellular growth in two phases, and can be illustrated with a diauxic growth curve. Diauxic growth, meaning double growth, is caused by the presence of two sugars on a culture growth media, one of which is easier for the target bacterium to metabolize. The preferred sugar is consumed first, which leads to rapid growth, followed by a lag phase. During the lag phase the cellular machinery used to metabolize the second sugar is activated and subsequently the second sugar is metabolized.\n\nThis can also occur when the bacterium in a closed batch culture consumes most of its nutrients and is entering the stationary phase when new nutrients are suddenly added to the growth media. The bacterium enters a lag phase where it tries to ingest the food. Once the food starts being utilized, it enters a new log phase showing a second peak on the growth curve.\n\nA diauxic growth curve refers to the growth curve generated by an organism which has two growth peaks. The theory behind the diauxic growth curve stems from Jacques Monod's Ph.D. research in 1940.\n\nA simple example involves the bacterium \"Escherichia coli\" (\"E. coli\"), the best understood bacterium. The bacterium is grown on a growth media containing two types of sugars, one of which is easier to metabolize than the other (for example glucose and lactose). First, the bacterium will metabolize all the glucose, and grow at a higher speed. Eventually, when all the glucose has been consumed, the bacterium will begin the process of expressing the genes to metabolize the lactose. This will only occur when all glucose in the media has been consumed. For these reasons, diauxic growth occurs in multiple phases.\n\nThe first phase is the \"fast growth phase\", since the bacterium is consuming (in the case of the above example) exclusively glucose, and is capable of rapid growth. The second phase is a \"lag phase\" while the genes used in lactose metabolism are expressed and observable cell growth stops. This is followed by another \"growth phase\" which is slower than the first because of the use of lactose as the primary energy source. The final stage is the \"saturation phase\". This process can also refer to the positive control of the lac operon.\n", "id": "32065785", "title": "Diauxic growth"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5670575", "text": "De novo synthesis\n\n\"De novo\" synthesis refers to the synthesis of complex molecules from simple molecules such as sugars or amino acids, as opposed to recycling after partial degradation. For example, nucleotides are not needed in the diet as they can be constructed from small precursor molecules such as formate and aspartate. Methionine, on the other hand, is needed in the diet because while it can be degraded to and then regenerated from homocysteine, it cannot be synthesized \"de novo\".\n\n\"De novo\" is a Latin phrase, literally translating to \"from the new,\" but implying \"anew,\" \"from scratch,\" or \"from the beginning.\"\n\n\"De novo\" DNA synthesis is DNA replication without the need for precursor template DNA. It's also referred to as artificial gene synthesis. Primase is an RNA polymerase, and it can add a primer to an existing strand awaiting replication. DNA polymerase cannot add primers, and therefore, needs primase to add the primer \"de novo\".\n\n\"De novo\" pathways do not use free bases: adenine (abbreviated as A), guanine (G), cytosine (C), thymine (T), or uracil (U). The purine ring is built up one atom or a few atoms at a time and attached to ribose throughout the process. Pyrimidine ring is synthesized as orotate and attached to ribose phosphate and later converted to common pyrimidine nucleotides. \"De novo\" synthesis enzymes are predicted to be present as large multienzyme complexes, although this hypothesis has yet to be thoroughly proven.\n\n", "id": "5670575", "title": "De novo synthesis"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3398691", "text": "Chondroblast\n\nChondroblasts, or perichondrial cells, is the name given to mesenchymal progenitor cells in situ which, from endochondral ossification, will form chondrocytes in the growing cartilage matrix. Another name for them is subchondral cortico-spongious progenitors. They have euchromatic nuclei and stain by basic dyes. These cells are extremely important in Chondrogenesis due to their role in forming both the Chondrocytes and cartilage matrix which will eventually form cartilage. Use of the term is technically inaccurate since mesenchymal progenitors can also technically differentiate into osteoblasts or fat. Chondroblasts are called Chondrocytes when they embed themselves in the cartilage matrix, consisting of proteoglycan and collagen fibers, until they lie in the matrix lacunae. Once they embed themselves into the cartilage matrix, they grow the cartilage matrix by growing more cartilage extracellular matrix rather than by dividing further.\n\nAs suggested in the name, mesenchymal progenitors originate from the mesoderm. These cells, when forming from the mesoderm, specifically form from embryonic stem cells via induction through BMP4 and fibroblast growth factor FGF2 while the fetus is inside the womb. It has been suggested that differentiating embryonic stem cells with these growth factors could prevent stem cells, once injected into potential patients, from forming teratomas, or stem cell caused tumors.\n\nAn important genetic component of this process is Sox9, a HMG box transcription factor, which marks progenitor cells for chondrogenic differentiation. Inactivation of the Sox9 gene will result in the loss of all Cartilage, and thus Chondroblast, formation. This factor is also expressed alongside Sox5 and Sox6.\n\nRunx2 is another important genetic component of Chondroblast formation. It has been found that expressing this gene will result in the suppression of the differentiation of chondroblasts. Expression of this gene will also prompt already formed cartilage to undergo endochondral ossification which will prompt the cartilage to form bone.\n\nIt is important to note here that these genes are not the only factors which determine whether chondroblasts will form. General inactivation or activation of these gene doesn't turn all affected cells into one type or another. Extrinsic environmental factors act upstream in determining what cell type will form out of any particular mesenchymal progenitor cell.\n\nWnt14 is controlled by Col2a1 and is put through the β-Catenin mediated Wnt pathway. Higher levels of Wnt14 prevented chondrocyte differentiation whereas lower levels appeared to allow it. If the Wnt/ β-Catenin pathway is upregulated, then endochondral ossification is encouraged which promotes ossification of the formed cartilage. This pathway is a canonical Wnt pathway because of the β-Catenin that accumulates once Wnt14 signalling is initiated. After Wnt14 is initiated, phosphorylation of the β-Catenin that would normally mark the protein for destruction is suppressed which allows it to accumulate and eventually go into the cell nucleus to bind to the LEF/TCF transcription factors which lead both to the destruction of any remaining phosphorylated β-Catenin as well as the differentiation of mesenchymal progenitor cells into osteoblasts.\n\nTesting of this pathway has indicated that the Wnt/β-Catenin increases β-Catenin levels before the activation of the Runx2 and Osx transcription factors which seems to suggest that early β-Catenin levels can be a sign of whether an early mesenchymal progenitor cell will progress to a chondrocyte or to an osteoblast.\n\nRetinoic acid, part of a family of molecules called retinoids, need to be repressed in order for Chondroblasts to form. A 2003 study using transgenic mice with a weak, constitutively active retinoic acid receptor found that retinoids maintain cells within condensations in a prechondrogenic, mesenchymal cell state which prevents cell differentiation. It has also been suggested that the inhibition of receptor mediated retinoid signaling induces Sox9 expression which is considered a “master switch” for the differentiation of chondroblasts.\n\nDifferentiation of chondroblasts is favored in an environment with high compressive force and low partial oxygen pressure which combine to inhibit protein 3, a protein which inhibits cartilage differentiation. These preferences are important since mature cartilage tissue is avascular and thus would be ill-suited to a high oxygen environment.\n\nWithin adults and developing adults, most chondroblasts are located in the perichondrium. This is a thin layer of connective tissue which protects cartilage and is where chondroblasts help to expand cartilage size whenever prompted to by hormones such as GH, TH, and glycosaminoglycans. They are located on the perichondrium because the perichondrium, located on the outside of developing bone, is not as heavily ensheathed in cartilage extracellular matrix as the interior and because here where capillaries are located. The type of growth maintained by chondroblasts is called appositional bone growth and increases the girth of the affected tissue. It is important to note that perichondrium, and thus chondroblasts, are not found on the articular cartilage surfaces of joints.\n\nThe extracellular matrix secreted by chondroblasts is composed of fibers, collagen, hyaluronic acid, proteoglycans, glycoproteins, water, and a host of macromolecules. Within finished cartilage, collagen fibers compose 10-20% of the volume, water 65-80%, and the proteoglycan-hyaluronic acid aggregates the remaining portion. Due to the proliferative nature of Chondroblasts, cells compose a larger portion of the composition than what is normally found within completed cartilage.\n\nCollagen Type II fibers are responsible for giving the future cartilage matrix its tensile strength. The structure of these fibers, like the majority of collagen fibers, forms a triple helix structure.\n\nProteoglycans resist the compression generally put upon cartilage and generate the swelling pressure responsible for stress shielding the matrix from compression loading. They attach themselves to up to 100 Chondroitin sulfate molecules and up to 50 keratan sulfate glycoaminoglycan chains. These chains together are attached to a hyaluronic acid backbone which, in conjunction with the collagen fibrils, create an interstitial intrafibrillar space in which water is held in by the negative charge of the proteoglycans.\n\nChondroblasts appear to migrate to cartilage whenever chondrocytes are destroyed via mechanical force. Remaining chondrocytes divide in order to form more chondroblasts. HMGB-1, a growth factor which promotes chondrocyte division while receptors for advanced glycation products (RAGE) mediated chemotaxis to clean up cell debris resulting from the damage. Chondroblasts then secrete cartilage matrix around themselves in order to reform the lost cartilage tissue.\n\nHowever, regeneration is still too slow for patient care to effectively rely on this mechanism of repair. Part of this inability to regenerate quickly from injury results from the relative avascular nature of cartilage as compared to other connective tissues of the human body.\n\nChondroblastomas can sometimes form, which are benign tumors that form at the sites of endochondral ossification due to over stimulation of the chondroblasts. When they form, they are usually found on the upper or lower tibia as well as the upper humerus where chondroblast activity is most apparent. Rarely, they can be found on the feet, hands, flat bones, or spine. 30-50% of these sarcomas have an accompanying osteoblastoma which is similarly benign.\n\nChondrosarcoma is a more malignant type of tumor, but most are low grade tumors and often appear in the axial skeletal region. It constitutes 20% of skeletal system tumors in the United States.\n", "id": "3398691", "title": "Chondroblast"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=188524", "text": "Cytopathology\n\nCytopathology (from Greek , \"kytos\", \"a hollow\"; , \"pathos\", \"fate, harm\"; and , \"-logia\") is a branch of pathology that studies and diagnoses diseases on the cellular level. The discipline was founded by George Nicolas Papanicolaou in 1928. Cytopathology is generally used on samples of free cells or tissue fragments, in contrast to histopathology, which studies whole tissues.\n\nCytopathology is commonly used to investigate diseases involving a wide range of body sites, often to aid in the diagnosis of cancer, but also in the diagnosis of some infectious diseases and other inflammatory conditions. For example, a common application of cytopathology is the Pap smear, a screening tool used to detect precancerous cervical lesions which may lead to cervical cancer. \n\nCytopathologic tests are sometimes called smear tests because the samples may be smeared across a glass microscope slide for subsequent staining and microscopic examination. However, cytology samples may be prepared in other ways, including cytocentrifugation. Different types of smear tests may also be used for cancer diagnosis. In this sense, it is termed a \"cytologic smear\".\n\nCytopathology is frequently, less precisely, called cytology, which means \"the study of cells\".\n\nThere are two methods of collecting cells for cytopathologic analysis: exfoliative cytology, and intervention cytology.\n\nIn this method, cells are collected after they have been either spontaneously shed by the body (\"spontaneous exfoliation\"), or manually scraped/brushed off of a surface in the body (\"mechanical exfoliation\"). An example of spontaneous exfoliation is when cells of the pleural cavity or peritoneal cavity are shed into the pleural or peritoneal fluid. This fluid can be collected via various methods for examination. Examples of mechanical exfoliation include Pap smears, where cells are scraped from the cervix with a cervical spatula, or bronchial brushings, where a bronchoscope is inserted into the trachea and used to evaluate a visible lesion by brushing cells from its surface and subjecting them to cytopathologic analysis. Liquid-based cytology collects the samples in the same way but places them in liquid that is then treated to allow for improved results.\n\nIn interventional cytology the pathologist intervenes into the body for sample collection. \n\nFine-needle aspiration, or fine-needle aspiration cytology (FNAC), involves use of a needle attached to a syringe is to collect cells from lesions or masses in various body organs by microcoring, often with the application of negative pressure (suction) to increase yield. FNAC can be performed under palpation guidance (i.e., the clinician can feel the lesion) on a mass in superficial regions like the neck, thyroid or breast; FNAC may be assisted by ultrasound or CAT scan for sampling of deep-seated lesions within the body that cannot be localized via palpation. FNAC is widely used in many countries, but success rate is dependent on the skill of the practitioner. If performed by a pathologist alone, or as team with pathologist-cytotechnologist, the success rate of proper diagnosis is superior than when performed by a non-pathologist. This may be due to the pathologist's ability to immediately evaluate specimens under a microscope and immediately repeat the procedure if sampling was inadequate.\n\nFine needles are 23 to 27 gauge. Because needles as small as 27 gauge can almost always yield diagnostic material, FNAC is often the least injurious way to obtain diagnostic tissue from a lesion. Sometime a syringe holder may be used to facilitate using one hand to perform the biopsy while the other hand is immobilizing the mass. Imaging equipment such as a CT scanner or ultrasound may be used to assist in locating the region to be biopsied.\n\nFNAC has become synonymous to interventional cytology.\n\nFor cytology of sediment, the sample is collected from the fixative that was used for processing the biopsy or autopsy specimen. The fixative is mixed properly and taken into a centrifuge tube and is centrifuged. The sediment is used for smearing. These sediments are the cells that are shed by the autopsy and biopsy specimen during processing.\n\nThe nucleus of the cell is very important in evaluating the cellular sample. In cancerous cells, altered DNA activity can be seen as a physical change in the nuclear qualities. Since more DNA is unfolded and being expressed, the nucleus will be darker and less uniform, larger than in normal cells, and often show a bright-red nucleolus.\n\nWhile the cytologist's primary responsibility is to discern whether cancerous or precancerous pathology is present in the cellular sample analysed, other pathologies may be seen such as:\n\n\nVarious normal functions of cell growth, metabolism, and division can fail or work in abnormal ways and lead to diseases.\n\nCytopathology is best used as one of three tools, the second and third being the physical examination and medical imaging. Cytology can be used to diagnose a condition and spare a patient from surgery to obtain a larger specimen. An example is thyroid FNAC; many benign conditions can be diagnosed with a superficial biopsy and the patient can go back to normal activities right away. If a malignant condition is diagnosed, the patient may be able to start radiation/chemotherapy, or may need to have surgery to remove and/or stage the cancer.\n\nSome tumors may be difficult to biopsy, such as sarcomas. Other rare tumors may be dangerous to biopsy, such as pheochromocytoma. In general, a fine-needle aspiration can be done anywhere it is safe to put a needle, including liver, lung, kidney, and superficial masses.\n\nProper cytopathology technique takes time to master. Cytotechnologists and cytopathologists can assist clinicians by assisting with sample collection. A \"quick read\" is a peek under the microscope and can tell the clinician whether enough diagnostic material was obtained. Cytological specimens must be properly prepared so that the cells are not damaged.\n\nFurther information about the specimen may be gained by immunohistochemical stains and molecular testing, particularly if the sample is prepared using liquid based cytology. Often \"reflex\" testing is performed, such as HPV testing on an abnormal pap test or flow cytometry on a lymphoma specimen.\n\nCytopathologic techniques are used in the examination of virtually all body organs and tissues:\n\n\n", "id": "188524", "title": "Cytopathology"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7125377", "text": "Myoepithelial cell\n\nMyoepithelial cells (sometimes referred to as myoepithelium) are cells usually found in glandular epithelium as a thin layer above the basement membrane but generally beneath the luminal cells. These may be positive for alpha smooth muscle actin and can contract and expel the secretions of exocrine glands. They are found in the sweat glands, mammary glands, lacrimal glands, and salivary glands. Myoepithelial cells in these cases constitute the basal cell layer of an epithelium that harbors the epithelial progenitor. In the case of wound healing, myoepithelial cells reactively proliferate. Presence of myoepithelial cells in a hyperplastic tissue proves the benignity of the gland and, when absent, indicates cancer. Only rare cancers like adenoid cystic carcinomas contains myoepithelial cells as one of the malignant components.\n\nIt can be found in endoderm or ectoderm.\n\nMyoepithelial cells are true epithelial cells positive for keratins, not to be confused with myofibroblasts which are true mesenchymal cells positive for vimentin. These cells are generally positive for alpha smooth muscle actin (αSMA), cytokeratin 5/6 and other high molecular weight cytokeratins, p63 and caldesmon.\nMyoepithelial cells are stellate in shape and are also known as basket cells.\nThey lie between the basement membrane and glandular epithelium.\nEach cell consists of a cell body from which 4-8 processes radiate and embrace the secretory unit. Myoepithelial cells have contractile functions. They help in expelling secretions from the lumen of secretory units and facilitate the movement of saliva in salivary ducts.\n\n", "id": "7125377", "title": "Myoepithelial cell"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=319342", "text": "Microfilament\n\nMicrofilaments, also called Actin Filaments, are filaments in the cytoplasm of eukaryotic cells that form part of the cytoskeleton. They are primarily composed of polymers of actin, but in cells are modified by and interact with numerous other proteins. Microfilaments are usually about 7 nm in diameter and composed of two strands of actin. Microfilament functions include cytokinesis, amoeboid movement and cell motility in general, changes in cell shape, endocytosis and exocytosis, cell contractility and mechanical stability. Microfilaments are flexible and relatively strong, resisting buckling by multi-piconewton compressive forces and filament fracture by nanonewton tensile forces. In inducing cell motility, one end of the actin filament elongates while the other end contracts, presumably by myosin II molecular motors. Additionally, they function as part of actomyosin-driven contractile molecular motors, wherein the thin filaments serve as tensile platforms for myosin's ATP-dependent pulling action in muscle contraction and pseudopod advancement. Microfilaments have a tough, flexible framework which helps the cell in movement.\n\nActin and microfilament-mediated processes have long been a subject of research. Engelmann (1879) suggested that many kinds of movement observed in plants and protozoa like cytoplasmic streaming and amoeboid movement were in fact a primitive version of the movements of muscle contraction.\n\nIn the 1930s, Szent-Györgyi and collaborators, violating one of the canons of biochemistry, started to study the residue instead of the extract\", that is, structural proteins and not enzymes, leading to the many discoveries related to microfilaments.\n\nActin filaments are assembled in two general types of structures: bundles and networks. Bundles can be composed of polar filament arrays, in which all barbed ends point to the same end of the bundle, or non-polar arrays, where the barbed ends point towards both ends. A class of actin-binding proteins, called cross-linking proteins, dictate the formation of these structures. Cross-linking proteins determine filament orientation and spacing in the bundles and networks. These structures are regulated by many other classes of actin-binding proteins, including motor proteins, branching proteins, severing proteins, polymerization promoters, and capping proteins.\n\nMeasuring approximately 6 nm in diameter, microfilaments are the thinnest fibers of the cytoskeleton. They are polymers of actin subunits (globular actin, or G-actin), which as part of the fiber are referred to as filamentous actin, or F-actin. Each microfilament is made up of two helical, interlaced strands of subunits. Much like microtubules, actin filaments are polarized. Electron micrographs have provided evidence of their fast-growing barbed-ends and their slow-growing pointed-end. This polarity has been determined by the pattern created by the binding of myosin S1 fragments: they themselves are subunits of the larger myosin II protein complex. The pointed end is commonly referred to as the minus (−) end and the barbed end is referred to as the plus (+) end.\n\n\"In vitro\" actin polymerization, or nucleation, starts with the self-association of three G-actin monomers to form a trimer. ATP-bound actin then itself binds the barbed end, and the ATP is subsequently hydrolyzed. ATP hydrolysis occurs with a half time of about 2 seconds, while the half time for the dissociation of the inorganic phosphate is about 6 minutes. This autocatalyzed event reduces the binding strength between neighboring subunits, and thus generally destabilizes the filament. \"In vivo\" actin polymerization is catalyzed by a class of filament end-tracking molecular motors known as actoclampins. Recent evidence suggests that the rate of ATP hydrolysis and the rate of monomer incorporation are strongly coupled.\n\nSubsequently, ADP-actin dissociates slowly from the pointed end, a process significantly accelerated by the actin-binding protein, cofilin. ADP bound cofilin severs ADP-rich regions nearest the (−)-ends. Upon release, the free actin monomer slowly dissociates from ADP, which in turn rapidly binds to the free ATP diffusing in the cytosol, thereby forming the ATP-actin monomeric units needed for further barbed-end filament elongation. This rapid turnover is important for the cell's movement. End-capping proteins such as CapZ prevent the addition or loss of monomers at the filament end where actin turnover is unfavorable, such as in the muscle apparatus.\n\nActin polymerization together with capping proteins were recently used to control the 3-dimensional growth of protein filament so as to perform 3D topologies useful in technology and the making of electrical interconnect. Electrical conductivity is obtained by metallisation of the protein 3D structure.\n\nAs a result of ATP hydrolysis, filaments elongate approximately 10 times faster at their barbed ends than their pointed ends. At steady-state, the polymerization rate at the barbed end matches the depolymerization rate at the pointed end, and microfilaments are said to be treadmilling. Treadmilling results in elongation in the barbed end and shortening in the pointed-end, so that the filament in total moves. Since both processes are energetically favorable, this means force is generated, the energy ultimately coming from ATP.\n\nIntracellular actin cytoskeletal assembly and disassembly are tightly regulated by cell signaling mechanisms. Many signal transduction systems use the actin cytoskeleton as a scaffold, holding them at or near the inner face of the peripheral membrane. This subcellular location allows immediate responsiveness to transmembrane receptor action and the resulting cascade of signal-processing enzymes.\n\nBecause actin monomers must be recycled to sustain high rates of actin-based motility during chemotaxis, cell signalling is believed to activate cofilin, the actin-filament depolymerizing protein which binds to ADP-rich actin subunits nearest the filament's pointed-end and promotes filament fragmentation, with concomitant depolymerization in order to liberate actin monomers. In most animal cells, monomeric actin is bound to profilin and thymosin beta-4, both of which preferentially bind with one-to-one stoichiometry to ATP-containing monomers. Although thymosin beta-4 is strictly a monomer-sequestering protein, the behavior of profilin is far more complex. Profilin enhances the ability of monomers to assemble by stimulating the exchange of actin-bound ADP for solution-phase ATP to yield actin-ATP and ADP. Profilin is transferred to the leading edge by virtue of its PIP binding site, and it employs its poly-L-proline binding site to dock onto end-tracking proteins. Once bound, profilin-actin-ATP is loaded into the monomer-insertion site of actoclampin motors.\n\nAnother important component in filament formation is the Arp2/3 complex, which binds to the side of an already existing filament (or \"mother filament\"), where it nucleates the formation of a new daughter filament at a 70 degree angle relative to the mother filament, effecting a fan-like branched filament network.\n\nIn non-muscle cells, actin filaments are formed proximal to membrane surfaces. Their formation and turnover are regulated by many proteins, including:\n\n\nThe actin filament network in non-muscle cells is highly dynamic. The actin filament network is arranged with the barbed-end of each filament attached to the cell's peripheral membrane by means of clamped-filament elongation motors, the above-mentioned \"actoclampins\", formed from a filament barbed-end and a clamping protein (formins, VASP, Mena, WASP, and N-WASP). The primary substrate for these elongation motors is profilin-actin-ATP complex which is directly transferred to elongating filament ends. The pointed-end of each filament is oriented toward the cell's interior. In the case of lamellipodial growth, the Arp2/3 complex generates a branched network, and in filopodia a parallel array of filaments is formed.\n\nMyosin motors are intracellular ATP-dependent enzymes that bind to and move along actin filaments. Various classes of myosin motors have very different behaviors, including exerting tension in the cell and transporting cargo vesicles.\n\nOne proposed model suggests the existence of actin filament barbed-end-tracking molecular motors termed \"actoclampin\". The proposed actoclampins generate the propulsive forces needed for actin-based motility of lamellipodia, filopodia, invadipodia, dendritic spines, intracellular vesicles, and motile processes in endocytosis, exocytosis, podosome formation, and phagocytosis. Actoclampin motors also propel such intracellular pathogens as \"Listeria monocytogenes\", \"Shigella flexneri\", \"Vaccinia\" and \"Rickettsia\". When assembled under suitable conditions, these end-tracking molecular motors can also propel biomimetic particles.\n\nThe term actoclampin is derived from \"acto\"- to indicate the involvement of an actin filament, as in actomyosin, and \"clamp\" to indicate a clasping device used for strengthening flexible/moving objects and for securely fastening two or more components, followed by the suffix -\"in\" to indicate its protein origin. An actin filament end-tracking protein may thus be termed a clampin.\n\nDickinson and Purich recognized that prompt ATP hydrolysis could explain the forces achieved during actin-based motility. They proposed a simple mechanoenzymatic sequence known as the Lock, Load & Fire Model, in which an end-tracking protein remains tightly bound (\"locked\" or clamped) onto the end of one sub-filament of the double-stranded actin filament. After binding to Glycyl-Prolyl-Prolyl-Prolyl-Prolyl-Prolyl-registers on tracker proteins, Profilin-ATP-actin is delivered (\"loaded\") to the unclamped end of the other sub-filament, whereupon ATP within the already clamped terminal subunit of the other subfragment is hydrolyzed (\"fired\"), providing the energy needed to release that arm of the end-tracker, which then can bind another Profilin-ATP-actin to begin a new monomer-addition round.\n\nThe following steps describe one force-generating cycle of an actoclampin molecular motor:\n\nWhen operating with the benefit of ATP hydrolysis, AC motors generate per-filament forces of 8–9 pN, which is far greater than the per-filament limit of 1–2 pN for motors operating without ATP hydrolysis. The term actoclampin is generic and applies to all actin filament end-tracking molecular motors, irrespective of whether they are driven actively by an ATP-activated mechanism or passively.\n\nSome actoclampins (e.g., those involving Ena/VASP proteins, WASP, and N-WASP) apparently require Arp2/3-mediated filament initiation to form the actin polymerization nucleus that is then \"loaded\" onto the end-tracker before processive motility can commence. To generate a new filament, Arp2/3 requires a \"mother\" filament, monomeric ATP-actin, and an activating domain from Listeria ActA or the VCA region of N-WASP. The Arp2/3 complex binds to the side of the mother filament, forming a Y-shaped branch having a 70 degree angle with respect to the longitudinal axis of the mother filament. Then upon activation by ActA or VCA, the Arp complex is believed to undergo a major conformational change, bringing its two actin-related protein subunits near enough to each other to generate a new filament gate. Whether ATP hydrolysis may be required for nucleation and/or Y-branch release is a matter under active investigation.\n\n", "id": "319342", "title": "Microfilament"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=479385", "text": "Extracellular fluid\n\nExtracellular fluid (ECF) denotes all body fluid outside the cells. Total body water in humans makes up between 45 to 75% of total body weight. About two thirds of this is intracellular fluid within cells, and one third is the extracellular fluid. The main component of the extracellular fluid is the interstitial fluid that bathes cells.\n\nExtracellular fluid is the internal environment of all multicellular animals, and in those animals with a blood circulatory system a proportion of this fluid is blood plasma. Plasma and interstitial fluid are the two compartments that make up at least 97% of the ECF. Lymph makes up a small percentage of the interstitial fluid. The remaining small portion of the ECF includes the transcellular fluid (about 2.5%). The ECF can also be seen as having two components – plasma and lymph as a delivery system, and interstitial fluid for water and solute exchange with the cells.\n\nThe extracellular fluid, in particular the interstitial fluid, constitutes the body's internal environment that bathes all of the cells in the body. The ECF composition is therefore crucial for their normal functions, and is maintained by a number of homeostatic mechanisms involving negative feedback. Homeostasis regulates, among others, the pH, sodium, potassium, and calcium concentrations in the ECF. The volume of body fluid, blood glucose, oxygen, and carbon dioxide levels are also tightly homeostatically maintained. \nThe volume of extracellular fluid in a young adult male of 70 kg is 20% of body weight – about fourteen litres. Eleven litres is interstitial fluid and the remaining three litres is plasma.\n\nThe main component of the extracellular fluid is the interstitial fluid which surrounds the cells in the body. The other major component of the ECF is the intravascular fluid of the circulatory system called blood plasma. The remaining small percentage of ECF includes the transcellular fluid. These constituents are often called fluid compartments. The transcellular fluid includes the aqueous humour in the eye, the synovial fluid in the joints, the cerebrospinal fluid in the brain and spinal cord, the serous fluid in the serous membranes lining body cavities and in the saliva and other gut fluids (gastric juice, pancreatic juice and other intestinal secretions), as well as the perilymph and endolymph in the inner ear. The volume of extracellular fluid in a young adult male of 70 kg, is 20% of body weight – about fourteen litres. \n\nThe interstitial fluid and the plasma make up about 97% of the ECF, and a small percentage of this is lymph. Interstitial fluid is fluid that surround cells providing them with nutrients and removing their waste products. Eleven litres of the ECF is interstitial fluid and the remaining three litres is plasma. Plasma and interstitial fluid are very similar because water, ions, and small solutes are continuously exchanged between them across the walls of capillaries, through pores and capillary clefts.\n\nInterstitial fluid, consists of a water solvent containing sugars, salts, fatty acids, amino acids, coenzymes, hormones, neurotransmitters, white blood cells and cell waste-products. This solution accounts for 26% of the water in the human body. The composition of interstitial fluid depends upon the exchanges between the cells in the biological tissue and the blood. This means that tissue fluid has a different composition in different tissues and in different areas of the body.\n\nThe plasma that filters through the capillaries into the interstitial fluid does not contain red blood cells or platelets as they are too large to pass through but can contain some white blood cells to help the immune system.\n\nOnce the extracellular fluid collects into small vessels it is considered to be lymph, and the vessels that carry it back to the blood are called the lymphatic vessels. The lymphatic system returns protein and excess interstitial fluid to the circulation.\n\nThe ionic composition of the interstitial fluid and blood plasma vary due to the Gibbs–Donnan effect. This causes a slight difference in the concentration of cations and anions between the two fluid compartments.\n\nThe extracellular fluid provides the medium for the exchange of substances between the ECF and the cells, and this can take place through dissolving, mixing and transporting in the fluid medium. Substances in the ECF include dissolved gases, nutrients, and electrolytes, all needed to maintain life. The ECF also contains materials secreted from cells in soluble form, but which quickly coalesces into fibres (e.g. collagen, reticular, and elastic fibres) or precipitates out into a solid or semisolid form (e.g. proteoglycans which form the bulk of cartilage, and the components of bone). These and many other substances occur, especially in association with various proteoglycans to form the extracellular matrix or the \"filler\" substance between the cells throughout the body. These substances occur in the extracellular space, and are therefore all bathed or soaked in ECF, without being part of the ECF.\n\nThe internal environment is stabilised in the process of homeostasis. Complex homeostatic mechanisms operate to regulate and keep the composition of the ECF stable. Individual cells can also regulate their internal composition by various mechanisms.\nThere is a significant difference between the concentrations of sodium and potassium ions inside and outside the cell. The concentration of sodium ions is considerably higher in the extracellular fluid than in the intracellular fluid. The converse is true of the potassium ion concentrations inside and outside the cell. These differences cause all cell membranes to be electrically charged, with the positive charge on the outside of the cells and the negative charge on the inside. In a resting neuron (not conducting an impulse) the membrane potential is known as the resting potential, and between the two sides of the membrane is about -70 mV.\n\nThis potential is created by sodium-potassium pumps in the cell membrane, which pump sodium ions out of the cell, into the ECF, in return for potassium ions which enter the cell from the ECF. The maintenance of this difference in the concentration of ions between the inside of the cell and the outside, is critical to keep normal cell volumes stable, and also to enable some cells to generate action potentials.\n\nIn several cell types voltage-gated ion channels in the cell membrane can be temporarily opened under specific circumstances for a few microseconds at a time. This allows a brief inflow of sodium ions into the cell (driven in by the sodium ion concentration gradient that exists between the outside and inside of the cell). This causes the cell membrane to temporarily depolarize (lose its electrical charge) forming the basis of action potentials.\n\nThe sodium ions in the ECF also play an important role in the movement of water from one body compartment to the other. When tears are secreted, or saliva is formed, sodium ions are pumped from the ECF into the ducts in which these fluids are formed and collected. The water content of these solutions results from the fact water follows the sodium ions (and accompanying anions) osmotically. The same principle applies to the formation of many other body fluids.\n\nCalcium ions have a great propensity to bind to proteins. This changes the distribution of electrical charges on the protein, with the consequence that the 3D (or tertiary) structure of the protein is altered. The normal shape, and therefore function of very many of the extracellular proteins, as well as the extracellular portions of the cell membrane proteins is dependent on a very precise ionized calcium concentration in the ECF. The proteins that are particularly sensitive to changes in the ECF ionized calcium concentration are several of the clotting factors in the blood plasma, which are functionless in the absence of calcium ions, but become fully functional on the addition of the correct concentration of calcium salts. The voltage gated sodium ion channels in the cell membranes of nerves and muscle have an even greater sensitivity to changes in the ECF ionized calcium concentration. Relatively small decreases in the plasma ionized calcium levels (hypocalcemia) cause these channels to leak sodium into the nerve cells or axons, making them hyper-excitable, thus causing spontaneous muscle spasms (tetany) and paraesthesia (the sensation of \"pins and needles\") of the extremities and round the mouth. When the plasma ionized calcium rises above normal (hypercalcemia) more calcium is bound to these sodium channels having the opposite effect, causing lethargy, muscle weakness, anorexia, constipation and labile emotions.\n\nThe tertiary structure of proteins is also affected by the pH of the bathing solution. In addition, the pH of the ECF affects the proportion of the total amount of calcium in the plasma which occurs in the free, or ionized form, as opposed to the fraction that is bound to protein and phosphate ions. A change in the pH of the ECF therefore alters the ionized calcium concentration of the ECF. Since the pH of the ECF is directly dependent on the partial pressure of carbon dioxide in the ECF, hyperventilation, which lowers the partial pressure of carbon dioxide in the ECF, produces symptoms that are almost indistinguishable from low plasma ionized calcium concentrations.\n\nThe extracellular fluid is constantly “stirred” by the circulatory system, which ensures that the watery environment which bathes the body’s cells is virtually identical throughout the body. This means that nutrients can be secreted into the ECF in one place (e.g. the gut, liver, or fat cells) and will, within about a minute, be evenly distributed throughout the body. Hormones are similarly rapidly and evenly spread to every cell in the body, regardless of where they are secreted into the blood. Oxygen taken up by the lungs from the alveolar air is also evenly distributed at the correct partial pressure to all the cells of the body. Waste products are also uniformly spread to the whole of the ECF, and are removed from this general circulation at specific points (or organs), once again ensuring that there is generally no localized accumulation of unwanted compounds or excesses of otherwise essential substances (e.g. sodium ions, or any of the other constituents of the ECF). The only significant exception to this general principle is the plasma in the veins, where the concentrations of dissolved substances in individual veins differs, to varying degrees, from those in the rest of the ECF. However this plasma is confined within the waterproof walls of the venous tubes, and therefore does not affect the interstitial fluid in which the body's cell live. When the blood from all the veins in body mixes in the heart and lungs, the differing compositions cancel out (e.g. acidic blood from active muscles is neutralized by the alkaline blood homeostatically produced by the kidneys). From the left atrium onward, to every organ in the body, the normal, homeostatically regulated values of all of the ECF’s components are therefore restored.\n\nThe arterial blood plasma, interstitial fluid and lymph interact at the level of the blood capillaries. The capillaries are permeable and water can move freely in and out. At the arteriolar end of the capillary the blood pressure is greater than the hydrostatic pressure in the tissues. Water will therefore seep out of the capillary into the interstitial fluid. The pores through which this water moves are large enough to allow all the smaller molecules (up to the size of small proteins such as insulin) to move freely through the capillary wall as well. This means that their concentrations across the capillary wall equalize, and therefore have no osmotic effect (because the osmotic pressure caused by these small molecules and ions – called the crystalloid osmotic pressure to distinguish it from the osmotic effect of the larger molecules than cannot move across the capillary membrane – is the same on both sides of capillary wall).\n\nThe movement of water out of the capillary at the arteriolar end causes the concentration of the substances that cannot cross the capillary wall to increase as the blood moves to the venular end of the capillary. The most important substances that are confined to the capillary tube are plasma albumin, the plasma globulins and fibrinogen. They, and particularly the plasma albumin, because of its molecular abundance in the plasma, are responsible for the so called ”oncotic” or \"colloid\" osmotic pressure which draws water back into the capillary, especially at the venular end.\n\nThe net effect of all of these processes is that water moves out of and back into the capillary, while the crystalloid substances in the capillary and interstitial fluids equilibrate. Since the capillary fluid is constantly and rapidly renewed by the flow of the blood, its composition dominates the equilibrium concentration that is achieved in the capillary bed. This ensures that the watery environment of the body’s cells is always close to their ideal environment (set by the body’s homeostats).\n\nA small proportion of the solution that leaks out of the capillaries is not drawn back into the capillary by the colloid osmotic forces. This amounts to between 2-4 liters per day for the body as a whole. This water is collected by the lymphatic system and is ultimately discharged into the left subclavian vein, where it mixes with the venous blood coming from the left arm, on its way to the heart. The lymph flows through lymph capillaries to lymph nodes where bacteria and tissue debris are removed from the lymph, while various types white blood cells (mainly lymphocytes) are added to the fluid. In addition the lymph which drains the small intestine contains fat droplets called chylomicrons after the ingestion of a fatty meal. This lymph is called chyle which has a milky appearance, and imparts the name lacteals (referring to the milky appearance of their contents) to the lymph vessels of the small intestine.\n\nMain cations:\n\nMain anions:\n\n\n", "id": "479385", "title": "Extracellular fluid"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32370985", "text": "Integrated stress response\n\nIntegrated Stress Response (ISR) is a cellular stress response common to all eukaryotes. ISR is a common denominator of different types of cellular stresses resulting in activation of at least one of the eIF-2 alpha (EIF2S1).\n\nISR results in the:\n\nPathways that activate eIF-2 alpha include:\n\nSee also endoplasmic reticulum stress and the unfolded protein response.\n", "id": "32370985", "title": "Integrated stress response"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32379221", "text": "Anal pore\n\nThe anal pore or cytoproct is a structure in various single-celled eukaryotes where waste is ejected after the nutrients from the food have been absorbed into the cytoplasm.\n", "id": "32379221", "title": "Anal pore"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32624519", "text": "Pit (botany)\n\nPits are thin portions of the cell wall that adjacent cells can communicate or exchange fluid through, utilizing plasmodesmata. Generally each pit has a complementary pit opposite of it in the neighboring cell. These complementary pits are called \"pit pairs\".\n\nPits are composed of three parts: the pit chamber, the pit aperture, and the pit membrane. The pit chamber is the hollow area where the cell wall is absent. The pit aperture is the opening at either end of the pit chamber. The pit membrane is the middle lamella, or the membrane between adjacent cell walls, at the middle of the pit chamber.\n\nPit pairs are a characteristic feature of the xylem, as sap flows through the pits of xylem cells.\n\nThough pits are usually simple and complementary, a few more pit variations can be formed:\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\nPlasmodesmata are thin sections of the endoplasmic reticulum that traverse pits and connect adjacent cells. These sections provide an avenue of transport through the pits and facilitate communication. The lack of width in the cell wall that creates pits is controlled by the plasmodesmata.\n\n", "id": "32624519", "title": "Pit (botany)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32690554", "text": "Cell counting\n\nCell counting is any of various methods for the counting or similar quantification of cells in the life sciences, including medical diagnosis and treatment. It is an important subset of cytometry, with applications in research and clinical practice. For example, the complete blood count can help a physician to determine why a patient feels unwell and what to do to help. Cell counts within liquid media (such as blood, plasma, lymph, or laboratory rinsate) are usually expressed as a number of cells per unit of volume, thus expressing a concentration (for example, 5,000 cells per milliliter).\n\nNumerous procedures in biology and medicine require the counting of cells. By the counting of cells in a known small volume, the concentration can be mediated. Examples of the need for cell counting include:\n\n\nThere are several methods for cell counting. Some are primitive and do not require special equipment, thus can be done in any biological laboratory, whereas others rely on sophisticated electronic appliances.\n\nA counting chamber,(also known as hemocytometer), is a microscope slide that is especially designed to enable cell counting. The hemocytometer has two gridded chambers in its middle, which are covered with a special glass slide when counting. A drop of cell culture is placed in the space between the chamber and the glass cover, filling it by capillarity. Looking at the sample under the microscope, the researcher uses the grid to manually count the number of cells in a certain area of known size. The separating distance between the chamber and the cover is predefined, thus the volume of the counted culture can be calculated and with it the concentration of cells. Cell viability can also be determined if viability dyes are added to the fluid.\n\nTheir advantage is being cheap and fast; this makes them the preferred counting method in fast biological experiments in which it needs to be merely determined whether a cell culture has grown as expected. Usually the culture examined needs to be diluted, otherwise the high density of cells would make counting impossible. The need for dilution is a disadvantage, as every dilution adds inaccuracy to the measurement.\n\nTo quantify the number of cells in a culture, the cells can be simply plated on a petri dish with growth medium. If the cells are efficiently distributed on the plate, it can be generally assumed that each cell will give rise to a single colony or Colony Forming Unit (CFU). The colonies can then be counted, and based on the known volume of culture that was spread on the plate, the cell concentration can be calculated.\n\nAs is with counting chambers, cultures usually need to be heavily diluted prior to plating; otherwise, instead of obtaining single colonies that can be counted, a so-called \"lawn\" will form: thousands of colonies lying over each other. Additionally, plating is the slowest method of all: most microorganisms need at least 12 hours to form visible colonies.\n\nAlthough this method can be time consuming, it gives an accurate estimate of the number of viable cells (because only they will be able to grow and form visible colonies). It is therefore extensively used in experiments aiming to quantify the number of cells resisting drugs or other external conditions (for instance the Luria–Delbrück experiment or the gentamicin protection assay). In addition, the enumeration of colonies on agar plates can be greatly facilitated by using colony counters.\n\nA Coulter counter is an appliance that can count cells as well as measure their volume. It is based on the fact that cells show great electrical resistance; in other words, they conduct almost no electricity. In a Coulter counter the cells, swimming in a solution that conducts electricity, are sucked one by one into a tiny gap. Flanking the gap are two electrodes that conduct electricity. When no cell is in the gap, electricity flows unabated, but when a cell is sucked into the gap the current is resisted. The Coulter counter counts the number of such events and also measures the current (and hence the resistance), which directly correlates to the volume of the cell trapped. A similar system is the CASY cell counting technology.\n\nCoulter and CASY counters are much cheaper than flow cytometers, and for applications that require cell numbers and sizes, such as cell-cycle research, they are the method of choice. Its advantage over the methods above is the large number of cells that can be processed in a short time, namely: thousands of cells per second. This offers great accuracy and statistical significance.\n\nFlow cytometry is by far the most sophisticated and expensive method for cell counting. In a flow cytometer the cells flow in a narrow stream in front of a laser beam. The beam hits them one by one, and a light detector picks up the light that is reflected from the cells.\n\nFlow cytometers have many other abilities, such as analyzing the shape of cells and their internal and external structures, as well as measuring the amount of specific proteins and other biochemicals in the cells. Therefore, flow cytometers are rarely purchased for the sole purpose of counting cells.\n\nRecent approaches consider the use of high-quality microscopy images over which a statistical classification algorithm is used to perform automated cell detection and counting as an image analysis task. Generally performs with a constant error rate as an off-line (batch) type process. A range of image classification techniques can be employed for this purpose.\n\nCell suspensions are turbid. Cells absorb and scatter the light. The higher the cell concentration, the higher the turbidity. Spectrophotometers can measure intensity of light very accurately. The cell culture is placed in a transparent cuvette and the absorption is measured relative to medium alone. Optical density (OD) is directly proportional to the biomass in the cell suspension in a given range that is specific to the cell type. Using spectrophotometry for measuring the turbidity of cultures is known as turbidometry.\n\nThis has made spectrophotometry the methods of choice for measurements of bacterial growth and related applications. Spectrophotometry's drawback is its inability to provide an absolute count or distinguish between living and dead cells.\n\nImpedance microbiology is a rapid microbiological technique used to measure the microbial concentration (mainly bacteria but also yeasts) of a sample by monitoring the electrical parameters of the growth medium. It is based on the fact that bacteria metabolism transforms uncharged (or weakly charged) compounds into highly charged compounds thus changing the growth medium electrical properties. The microbial concentration is estimated on the time required for the monitored electrical parameters to deviate from the initial baseline value.\nDifferent instruments (either built in a laboratory or commercially available) to measure the bacterial concentration using Impedance Microbiology are available.\n", "id": "32690554", "title": "Cell counting"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21942008", "text": "Cell polarity\n\nCell polarity refers to spatial differences in shape, structure, and function within a cell. Almost all cell types exhibit some form of polarity, which enables them to carry out specialized functions. Classical examples of polarized cells are described below, including epithelial cells with apical-basal polarity, neurons in which signals propagate in one direction from dendrites to axons, and migrating cells.\n\nEpithelial cells adhere to one another through tight junctions, desmosomes and adherens junctions, forming sheets of cells that line the surface of the animal body and internal cavities (e.g., digestive tract and circulatory system). These cells have an apical-basal polarity defined by the apical membrane facing the outside surface of the body, or the lumen of internal cavities, and the basolateral membrane oriented away from the lumen. The basolateral membrane refers to both the lateral membrane where cell-cell junctions connect neighboring cells and to the basal membrane where cells are attached to the basement membrane, a thin sheet of extracellular matrix proteins that separates the epithelial sheet from underlying cells and connective tissue. Epithelial cells also exhibit planar cell polarity,in which specialized structures are orientated within the plane of the epithelial sheet. Some examples of planar cell polarity include the scales of fish being oriented in the same direction and similarly the feathers of birds, the fur of mammals, and the cuticular projections (sensory hairs, etc.) on the bodies and appendages of flies and other insects.\n\nA neuron receives signals from neighboring cells through branched, cellular extensions called dendrites. The neuron then propagates an electrical signal down a specialized axon extension to the synapse, where neurotransmitters are released to propagate the signal to another neuron or effector cell (e.g., muscle or gland). The polarity of the neuron thus facilitates the directional flow of information, which is required for communication between neurons and effector cells.\n\nMany cell types are capable of migration, such as leukocytes and fibroblasts, and in order for these cells to move in one direction, they must have a defined front and rear. At the front of the cell is the leading edge, which is often defined by a flat ruffling of the cell membrane called the lamellipodium or thin protrusions called filopodia. Here, actin polymerization in the direction of migration allows cells to extend the leading edge of the cell and to attach to the surface. At the rear of the cell, adhesions are disassembled and bundles of actin microfilaments, called stress fibers, contract and pull the trailing edge forward to keep up with the rest of the cell. Without this front-rear polarity, cells would be unable to coordinate directed migration.\n\n\"Main article: Polarity establishment in yeast \"\n\nGeneration of cellular polarity is critically important for the function of practically every cell type and underlies processes like cell division, differentiation, cell migration, cell–cell signalling and fertilization. Cell polarity is an example of the self-organization property that all living organism share. All the cells within a multicellular organism, or any single cell species i.e. yeast, displays a polarized organization necessary for its proliferation, differentiation or physiological function. Budding yeast is a highly accessible experimental system, which serves as a paradigm for deciphering the molecular mechanism underlying the generation of polarity. Yeast cells share many features about cell polarity with other organism like: regulation by intrinsic and extrinsic cues, conserved regulatory molecules such as Cdc42GTPase, and asymmetry of the cytoskeleton. Cell polarization is associated with a type of symmetry breaking, that occurs in the cytoskeleton and guides the direction of growth of the future daughter cell. This symmetry breaking facilitates the polarized flux and localization of several protein in the polarized patch. When cells can perform symmetry breaking in absence of any spatial cue (landmarks), is called spontaneous polarization or spontaneous symmetry breaking.\n\nIn short, polarity establishment or symmetry breaking, in this context, is the first step for cell polarity and consequently cell division. We are interested in the spontaneous symmetry breaking, as an example of self-organization phenomena in living cells. One of the way, and one of the most popular ones, to study spontaneous symmetry breaking is by correlating it with a type of reaction- diffusion phenomena.\n\nThe molecular identity of most important proteins involved in leading spontaneous symmetry breaking have been extensively studied. Those proteins have been categorized in general modules that represent the main functional cores for yeast life cycle. However, the molecular mechanisms responsible for this regulatory network are still poorly understood. Extensive work done in many organisms ranging from prokaryotes to high complex ones has revealed a central role of small GTPases in the cell polarization process. Particularly in yeast, this protein is Cdc42, which is a member of the eukaryotic Ras-homologous Rho-family of GTPases, which is part of the wider super-family of small GTPases, including Rop GTPases in plants and small GTPases in prokaryotes.\n\nA recent study to elucidate the connection between cell cycle timing and Cdc42 accumulation in the bud site uses optogenetics to control protein localization using light. \n\nFurthermore, using experimental evolution, function and robustness of yeast polarity establishment have been studied.\n\nThe bodies of vertebrate animals are asymmetric along three axes: anterior-posterior (head to tail), dorsal-ventral (spine to belly), and left-right (for example, our heart is on the left side of our body). These polarities arise within the developing embryo through a combination of several processes: 1) asymmetric cell division, in which two daughter cells receive different amounts of cellular material (e.g. mRNA, proteins), 2) asymmetric localization of specific proteins or RNAs within cells (which is often mediated by the cytoskeleton), 3) concentration gradients of secreted proteins across the embryo such as Wnt, Nodal, and Bone Morphogenic Proteins (BMPs), and 4) differential expression of membrane receptors and ligands that cause lateral inhibition, in which the receptor-expressing cell adopts one fate and its neighbors another.\n\nIn addition to defining asymmetric axes in the adult organism, cell polarity also regulates both individual and collective cell movements during embryonic development such as apical constriction, invagination, and epiboly. These movements are critical for shaping the embryo and creating the complex structures of the adult body.\n\nCell polarity arises primarily through the localization of specific proteins to specific areas of the cell membrane. This localization requires both the recruitment of cytoplasmic proteins to the cell membrane and polarized vesicle transport along cytoskeletal filaments to deliver transmembrane proteins from the golgi apparatus. Many of the molecules responsible for regulating cell polarity are conserved across cell types and throughout metazoan species. Examples include the PAR complex (Cdc42, PAR3/ASIP, PAR6, atypical protein kinase C), Crumbs complex (Crb, PALS, PATJ, Lin7), and Scribble complex (Scrib, Dlg, Lgl). These polarity complexes are localized at the cytoplasmic side of the cell membrane, asymmetrically within cells. For example, in epithelial cells the PAR and Crumbs complexes are localized along the apical membrane and the Scribble complex along the lateral membrane. Together with a group of signaling molecules called Rho GTPases, these polarity complexes can regulate vesicle transport and also control the localization of cytoplasmic proteins primarily by regulating the phosphorylation of phospholipids called phosphoinositides. Phosphoinositides serve as docking sites for proteins at the cell membrane, and their state of phosphorylation determines which proteins can bind.\n\n", "id": "21942008", "title": "Cell polarity"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8631841", "text": "Glycosome\n\nThe glycosome is a membrane-enclosed organelle that contains the glycolytic enzymes. The term was first used by Scott and Still in 1968 after they realized that the glycogen in the cell was not static but rather a dynamic molecule. It is found in a few species of protozoa including the Kinetoplastida which included the suborders Trypanosomatina and Bodonina, most notably in the human pathogenic trypanosomes, which can cause sleeping sickness and Chagas's disease, and leishmaniasis. The organelle is bounded by a single membrane and contains a dense proteinaceous matrix. It is believed to have evolved from the peroxisome. This has been verified by work done on Leishmania genetics.\n\nThe glycosome is currently being researched as a possible target for drug therapies.\n\nGlycosomes are unique to kinetoplastids.\nThe term glycosome is also used for glycogen-containing structures found in hepatocytes responsible for storing sugar, but these are not membrane bound organelles. \nGlycosomes are composed of glycogen and proteins. The proteins are the enzymes that are associated with the metabolism of glycogen. These proteins and glycogen form a complex to make a distinct and separate organelle. The proteins for glycosomes are imported from free cytosolic ribosomes. The proteins imported into the organelle have a specific sequence, a PTS1 ending sequence to make sure they go to the right place. They are similar to alpha-granules in the cytosol of a cell that are filled with glycogen. Glycosomes are typically round-to-oval shape with size varying in each cell. Although glycogen is found in the cytoplasm, that in the glycosome is separate, surrounded by membrane. The membrane is a lipid bilayer. The glycogen that is found within the glycosome is identical to glycogen found freely in the cytosol. Glycosomes can be associated or attached to many different types of organelles. They have been found to be attached to the sarcoplasmic reticulum and its intermediate filaments. Other glycosomes have been found to be attached to myofibrils and mitochondria, rough endoplasmic reticulum, sarcolemma, polyribosomes, or the Golgi apparatus. Glycosome attachment may bestow a functional distinction between them; the glycosomes attached to the myofibrils seem to serve the myosin by providing energy substrates for generation of ATP through glycolysis. The glycosomes in the rough and smooth endoplasmic reticulum make use of its glycogen synthase and phosphorylase phosphatases.\n\nGlycosomes function in many processes in the cell. These processes include glycolysis, purine salvage, beta oxidation of fatty acids, and ether lipid synthesis.\n\nThe main function that the glycosome serves is of the glycolytic pathway that is done inside its membrane. By compartmentalizing glycolysis inside of the glycosome, the cell can be more successful. In the cell, action in the cytosol, the mitochondria, and the glycosome are all completing the function of energy metabolism. This energy metabolism generates ATP through the process of glycolysis. The glycosome is a host of the main glycolytic enzymes in the pathway for glycolysis. This pathway is used to break down fatty acids for their carbon and energy. The entire process of glycolysis does not take place in the glycosome however. Rather, only the Embden-Meyerhof segment where the glucose enters into the glycosome. Importantly, the process in the organelle has no net ATP synthesis. This ATP comes later from processes outside of the glycosome. Inside of the glycosome does need NAD+ for functioning and its regeneration. Fructose 1,6-biphosphate is used in the glycosome as a way to help obtain oxidizing agents to help start glycolysis. The glycosome converts the sugar into 3-phosphoglycerate.\n\nAnother function of glycosomes is purine salvage. The parasites which have glycosomes present in their cells cannot make purine de novo. This purine that is made in the glycosome is then exported out of the glycosome to be used in the cell in nucleic acid. In other cells the enzymes responsible for this are present in the cytosol. These enzymes found in the glycosome to help with synthesis are guanine and adenine phosphoribosyl transferase, hypoxanthine, and xanthine pho tran. All of these enzymes contain a PTS1 sequence at their carboxyl sequence so that they are sent to the glycosome.\n\nMicroscopic techniques have revealed a lot about the glycosome in the cell and have indeed proven that there is a membrane-bound organelle in the cell for glycogen and its processes. Paul Erlich's findings as early as 1883 noted that from the microscope he could tell that glycogen in the cell was always found with what he called a carrier, later known to be protein. The glycogen itself was also always seen in the cell towards the lower pole in one group, fixed. When scientists tried to stain what was assumed was simple glycogen molecules, the staining had different outcomes. This is due to the fact that they weren't free glycogen molecules but really a glycosome. The glycosome was studied in the microscope by examining the glycosome that was stained with uranyl acetate. The U/Pb that was seen stained was the protein that was part of the glycosome. The glycogen in the glycosome in the cells is normally associated with protein that is two to four times the weight of the glycogen. The glycogen itself however, after purified, is found with very little protein, less than three percent normally, showing that the glycosome is responsible and functions by having the proteins and enzymes needed for the glycogen in the glycosome. With the uranyl staining, as an acid, it would cause dissociation of the protein from the glycogen. The glycogen without the protein would form large aggregates and the stain would be the protein. This gives the illusion of glycogen disappearing as it is not stained, but it dissociates from the protein that it is normally associated with in the glycosome.\n\nThere has been a variety of evidence found biochemically to give evidence that glycosomes are present in cells. In the organelle that is assumed to be a glycosome, numerous proteins are found. These include glycogen synthase, phosphorylase, and branching and debranching enzymes for glycogen. All of these are regulatory enzymes that are needed in glycogen synthesis. The initiation of synthesis of glycogen requires glycogenin, found in glycosomes, a protein primer. Glycogen synthase as mentioned helps in glycogen elongation and the removal of the glucose from glycogen is aided by debranching enzymes and phosphorylase. All of these enzymes are found in the glycosome, showing that this organelle complete with glycogen as well is responsible for storing glycogen and separate from the cytosol.\n\nThere are two types of glycosomes that are found in cells exhibiting these specialized organelles. These two groups are lyoglycosomes and desmoglycosomes. They differ in their association with other organelles in the cell, along with their relative abundance. Studies have shown that healthy cells have more lyoglycosomes while starved cells have more desmoglycosomes.\n\nLyoglycosomes are glycosomes that are free in the cytosol of the cell. These types of glycosomes are affected by acid. They tend to be less electron dense than the other type of glycosome. Lyoglycosomes also are usually found in chains in the cytosol. Because the lyoglycosomes are not bound to tissue, it is possible to extract these glycosomes with water that is boiling.\n\nDesmoglcosomes are not free in the cytosol but rather are with other organelles or structures in the cell. These structures relate to the other organelles mentioned such as the myofibrils, mitochondria, and endoplasmic reticulum. This accounts for why desmoglycosomes are found in muscle cells. These glycosomes are not affected by acid. These glycosomes are not found to form groups but rather stay separate as single organelles. Because of the high amount of protein that the glycosome associates with, a high electron density is usually observed. Desmoglycosomes are not extractable from boiling water as they are bound to tissue through their connection to protein.\n\nThe glycosomes are the most divergent of the different types of organelles stemming from peroxisomes, especially as seen in the trypanosomes. Peroxisomes of higher eukaryotes are very similar to the glycosomes and the glyoxysomes that are found in some plants and fungi. The glycosome shares the same basic level structure of a single membrane and a very dense protein matrix. Some studies have shown that some of the enzymes and pathways that are found in the peroxisome are also seen in glycosomes of some species of the trypanosomes. Also, the targeting sequences on the proteins that are sent to the glycosome for the protein matrix are similar in sequence to those sequences on proteins being imported into the peroxisome. The same is seen in the actual sequences for the proteins going into the matrices for these two organelles, not just the targeting sequences. It has been speculated that the since it has been found that glycosomes possess plastid like proteins, a lateral gene transfer happened long ago from an organism capable of photosynthesis whose genes were transferred to have the resultant peroxisomes and glycosomes. The glycosome itself, along with the peroxisome, lacks a genome.\n\nUnlike peroxisomes, for most of the trypanosomes their glycosomes are needed for them to be able to survive. Because of this need for the glycosome, it has been suggested as a possible drug target to find a drug to halt its function. When the glycosome is not functioning correctly there is a severe lack of enzymes in the cell. These enzymes are those associated with ether-lipid synthesis or the beta oxidation of certain fatty acids. Cells without glycosomes are deficient in these enzymes as without the compartmentalization of the glycosome the enzymes are degraded in the cell in the cytosol. The organelle keeps metabolism of the enzymes from occurring. For parasites, ether-lipid synthesis is vital to be able to complete its life cycle, making the enzymes protected by the glycosome also vital. In their life cycle, glycolysis partly through the glycosome is very high in the blood stream form comparatively to the pro-cyclic form. The glycosomal glycolysis pathway is necessary in stress situations for the pathogen as glycolysis can be started when the substrates for the pathway are available even when ATP is not available yet. So as this organelle is so essential for the trypanosome, if a drug could target this organelle, it could be a successful therapy as studies have shown without the glycosome parasite death occurs. \n", "id": "8631841", "title": "Glycosome"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11225948", "text": "Spitzenkörper\n\nThe Spitzenkörper (German for pointed body) is a structure found in fungal hyphae that is the organizing center for hyphal growth and morphogenesis. It consists of many small vesicles and is present in growing hyphal tips, during spore germination and where branch formation occurs. Its position in the hyphal tip correlates with the direction of hyphal growth. The Spitzenkörper is a part of the endomembrane system in fungi.\n\nThe vesicles are organized around a central area that contains a dense meshwork of microfilaments. Polysomes are often found closely to the posterior boundary of the Spitzenkörper core within the \"Ascomycota\", microtubules extend into and often through the Spitzenkörper and within the Ascomycota Woronin bodies are found in the apical region near the Spitzenkörper.\n\nThe cytoplasm of the extreme apex is occupied almost exclusively by secretory vesicles. In the higher fungi (Ascomycota and Basidiomycota), secretory vesicles are arranged into a dense, spherical aggregation called the Spitzenkörper or ‘apical body’. The Spitzenkörper may be seen in growing hyphae even with the light microscope. Hyphae of the Oomycota and some lower Eumycota (notably the Zygomycota) do not contain a recognizable Spitzenkörper, and the vesicles are instead distributed more loosely often in a crescent-shaped arrangement beneath the apical plasma membrane.\n", "id": "11225948", "title": "Spitzenkörper"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33017842", "text": "Pleomorphism (cytology)\n\nPleomorphism is a term used in histology and cytopathology to describe variability in the size, shape and staining of cells and/or their nuclei. \n\nIt is a feature characteristic of malignant neoplasms, and dysplasia. Certain benign cell types may have pleomorphism, e.g. neuroendocrine cells, Arias-Stella reaction.\n\n", "id": "33017842", "title": "Pleomorphism (cytology)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1648525", "text": "Nuclear localization sequence\n\nA nuclear localization signal \"or\" sequence (NLS) is an amino acid sequence that 'tags' a protein for import into the cell nucleus by nuclear transport. Typically, this signal consists of one or more short sequences of positively charged lysines or arginines exposed on the protein surface. Different nuclear localized proteins may share the same NLS. An NLS has the opposite function of a nuclear export signal (NES), which targets proteins out of the nucleus.\n\nThese types of NLSs can be further classified as either monopartite or bipartite. The major structural differences between the two is that the two basic amino acid clusters in bipartite NLSs are separated by a relatively short spacer sequence (hence bipartite - 2 parts), while monopartite NLSs are not. The first NLS to be discovered was the sequence PKKKRKV in the SV40 Large T-antigen (a monopartite NLS). The NLS of nucleoplasmin, KR[PAATKKAGQA]KKKK, is the prototype of the ubiquitous bipartite signal: two clusters of basic amino acids, separated by a spacer of about 10 amino acids. Both signals are recognized by importin α. Importin α contains a bipartite NLS itself, which is specifically recognized by importin β. The latter can be considered the actual import mediator.\n\nChelsky \"et al\". proposed the consensus sequence K-K/R-X-K/R for monopartite NLSs. A Chelsky sequence may, therefore, be part of the downstream basic cluster of a bipartite NLS. Makkerh \"et al\". carried out comparative mutagenesis on the nuclear localization signals of SV40 T-Antigen (monopartite), C-myc (monopartite), and nucleoplasmin (bipartite), and showed amino acid features common to all three. The role of neutral and acidic amino acids was shown for the first time in contributing to the efficiency of the NLS.\n\nRotello \"et al\". compared the nuclear localization efficiencies of eGFP fused NLSs of SV40 Large T-Antigen, Nucleoplasmin (AVKRPAATKKAGQAKKKKLD), EGL-13 (MSRRRKANPTKLSENAKKLAKEVEN), c-Myc (PAAKRVKLD) and TUS-protein (KLKIKRPVK) through rapid intracellular protein delivery. They found significantly higher nuclear localization efficiency of c-Myc NLS compared to that of SV40 NLS.\n\nThere are many other types of NLS, such as the acidic M9 domain of hnRNP A1, the sequence KIPIK in yeast transcription repressor Matα2, and the complex signals of U snRNPs. Most of these NLSs appear to be recognized directly by specific receptors of the importin β family without the intervention of an importin α-like protein.\n\nA signal that appears to be specific for the massively produced and transported ribosomal proteins, seems to come with a specialized set of importin β-like nuclear import receptors.\n\nRecently a class of NLSs known as PY-NLSs has been proposed, originally by Lee \"et al.\" This PY-NLS motif, so named because of the proline-tyrosine amino acid pairing in it, allows the protein to bind to Importin β2 (also known as transportin or karyopherin β2), which then translocates the cargo protein into the nucleus. The structural basis for the binding of the PY-NLS contained in Importin β2 has been determined and an inhibitor of import designed.\n\nThe presence of the nuclear membrane that sequesters the cellular DNA is the defining feature of eukaryotic cells. The nuclear membrane, therefore, separates the nuclear processes of DNA replication and RNA transcription from the cytoplasmic process of protein production. Proteins required in the nucleus must be directed there by some mechanism. The first direct experimental examination of the ability of nuclear proteins to accumulate in the nucleus were carried out by John Gurdon when he showed that purified nuclear proteins accumulate in the nucleus of frog (Xenopus) oocytes after being micro-injected into the cytoplasm. These experiments were part of a series that subsequently led to studies of nuclear reprogramming, directly relevant to stem cell research.\n\nThe presence of several million pore complexes in the oocyte nuclear membrane and the fact that they appeared to admit many different molecules (insulin, bovine serum albumin, gold nanoparticles) led to the view that the pores are open channels and nuclear proteins freely enter the nucleus through the pore and must accumulate by binding to DNA or some other nuclear component. In other words, there was thought to be no specific transport mechanism.\n\nThis view was shown to be incorrect by Dingwall and Laskey in 1982. Using a protein called Nucleoplasmin, the archetypal ‘molecular chaperone’, they identified a domain in the protein that acts as a signal for nuclear entry. This work stimulated research in the area, and two years later the first NLS was identified in SV40 Large T-antigen (or SV40, for short). However, a functional NLS could not be identified in another nuclear protein simply on the basis of similarity to the SV40 NLS. In fact, only a small percentage of cellular (non-viral) nuclear proteins contained a sequence similar to the SV40 NLS. A detailed examination of Nucleoplasmin identified a sequence with two elements made up of basic amino acids separated by a spacer arm. One of these elements was similar to the SV40 NLS but was not able to direct a protein to the cell nucleus when attached to a non-nuclear reporter protein. Both elements are required. This kind of NLS has become known as a bipartite classical NLS. The bipartite NLS is now known to represent the major class of NLS found in cellular nuclear proteins and structural analysis has revealed how the signal is recognized by a receptor (importin α) protein (the structural basis of some monopartite NLSs is also known). Many of the molecular details of nuclear protein import are now known. This was made possible by the demonstration that nuclear protein import is a two-step process; the nuclear protein binds to the nuclear pore complex in a process that does not require energy. This is followed by an energy-dependent translocation of the nuclear protein through the channel of the pore complex. By establishing the presence of two distinct steps in the process the possibility of identifying the factors involved was established and led on to the identification of the importin family of NLS receptors and the GTPase Ran.\n\nProteins gain entry into the nucleus through the nuclear envelope. The nuclear envelope consists of concentric membranes, the outer and the inner membrane. The inner and outer membranes connect at multiple sites, forming channels between the cytoplasm and the nucleoplasm. These channels are occupied by nuclear pore complexes (NPCs), complex multiprotein structures that mediate the transport across the nuclear membrane.\n\nA protein translated with a NLS will bind strongly to importin (aka karyopherin), and, together, the complex will move through the nuclear pore. At this point, Ran-GTP will bind to the importin-protein complex, and its binding will cause the importin to lose affinity for the protein. The protein is released, and now the Ran-GTP/importin complex will move back out of the nucleus through the nuclear pore. A GTPase-activating protein (GAP) in the cytoplasm hydrolyzes the Ran-GTP to GDP, and this causes a conformational change in Ran, ultimately reducing its affinity for importin. Importin is released and Ran-GDP is recycled back to the nucleus where a Guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) exchanges its GDP back for GTP.\n\n\n\n", "id": "1648525", "title": "Nuclear localization sequence"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=986020", "text": "Cytolysis\n\nCytolysis, or osmotic lysis, occurs when a cell bursts due to an osmotic imbalance that has caused excess water to move into the cell. The water enters the cell through selective membrane channels called aquaporins which also prevent the loss ions and other solutes at the same time. It occurs in a hypotonic environment, where water moves into the cell by osmosis and causes its volume to increase to the point where the volume exceeds the membrane's capacity and the cell bursts. The presence of a cell wall prevents the membrane from bursting, so cytolysis only occurs in animal and protozoa cells which do not have cell walls. The reverse process is plasmolysis.\n\nOsmotic lysis is often one result of a stroke, because of improper nutrient perfusion and waste removal alter cell metabolism. Such malfunction results in an inflow of extracellular fluid into the cells. Osmotic lysis is also used by the immune system in animals to kill the cancer cells and stop tumor growth.\n\nOsmotic lysis would be expected to occur when bacterial cells are treated with a hypotonic solution with added lysozyme, which destroys the bacteria's cell walls.\n\nDifferent cells and organisms have adapted different ways of preventing cytolysis from occurring. For example, the paramecium uses a contractile vacuole, which rapidly pumps out excessive water to prevent the build-up of water and the otherwise subsequent lysis. Additionally, these protists have cell membranes which are less permeable to water than some other species.\n\nOther organisms pump solutes out of their cytosol, which brings the solute concentration closer to that of their environment and slows down the process of water's diffusion into the cell, preventing cytolysis. If the cell can pump out enough solutes so that an isotonic environment can be achieved, there will be no net movement of water.\n\n", "id": "986020", "title": "Cytolysis"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28352410", "text": "Plasmid-mediated resistance\n\nPlasmid-mediated resistance is the transfer of antibiotic resistance genes which are carried on plasmids. The plasmids can be transferred between bacteria within the same species or between different species via conjugation. Plasmids often carry multiple antibiotic resistance genes, contributing to the spread of multidrug-resistance (MDR). Antibiotic resistance mediated by MDR plasmids severely limits the treatment options for the infections caused by Gram-negative bacteria, especially \"Enterobacteriaceae\" family. The global spread of MDR plasmids has been enhanced by selective pressure from antibiotic usage in human and veterinary medicine.\n\nResistance plasmids by definition carry one or more antibiotic resistance genes. They are frequently accompanied by the genes encoding virulence determinants, specific enzymes or resistance to toxic heavy metals. Multiple resistance genes are commonly arranged in the resistance cassettes. The antibiotic resistance genes found on the plasmids confer resistance to most of the antibiotic classes used nowadays, for example, beta-lactams, fluoroquinolones and aminoglycosides.\n\nIt is very common for the resistance genes or entire resistance cassettes to be re-arranged on the same plasmid or be moved to a different plasmid or chromosome by means of recombination systems. Examples of such systems include integrons and transposons.\n\nMost of the resistance plasmids are conjugative, meaning that they encode all the needed components for the transfer of the plasmid to other bacterium. Other smaller plasmids (usually < 10 kb in size) can be mobilized by a conjugative plasmid (usually > 30 kb) in order to be transferred.\n\nMembers of \"Enterobacteriaceae\" family, for example, \"Escherichia coli\" or \"Klebsiella pneumoniae\" pose the biggest threat regarding plasmid-mediated resistance in hospital- and community-acquired infections. \n\nBoth narrow spectrum beta-lactamases (e.g. penicillinases) and extended spectrum beta-lactamases (ESBL) are common for resistance plasmids in \"Enterobacteriaceae\". Often multiple beta-lactamase genes are found on the same plasmid hydrolyzing a wide spectrum of beta-lactam antibiotics. \n\nESBL enzymes can hydrolyze all beta-lactam antibiotics, including cephalosporins, except for the carpabepenems. The first clinically observed ESBL enzymes were mutated versions of the narrow spectrum beta-lactamases, like TEM and SHV. Other ESBL enzymes originate outside of Enterobacteriaceae family, but have been spreading as well.\n\nIn addition, since the plasmids that carry ESBL genes also commonly encode resistance determinants for many other antibiotics, ESBL strains are often resistant to many non-beta-lactam antibiotics as well, leaving very few options for the treatment. \n\nCarbapenemases represent type of ESBL which are able to hydrolyze carbapenem antibiotics that are considered as the last-resort treatment for ESBL-producing bacteria. KPC, NDM-1, VIM and OXA-48 carbapenemases have been increasingly reported worldwide as causes of hospital-acquired infections. \n\nQuinolone resistance genes are frequently located on the same plasmid as the ESBL genes. Examples of resistance mechanisms include different Qnr proteins, aminoglycose acetyltransferase aac(6')-Ib-cr that is able to hydrolyze ciprofloxacin and norfloxacin, as well as efflux transporters OqxAB and QepA.\n\nAminoglycoside resistance genes are also commonly found together with ESBL genes. Resistance to aminoglycosides is conferred via numerous aminoglycoside-modifying enzymes and 16S rRNA methyltransferases.\n\n", "id": "28352410", "title": "Plasmid-mediated resistance"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33231480", "text": "Chromatin bridge\n\nChromatin bridge is a mitotic occurrence that forms when telomeres of sister chromatids fuse together and fail to completely segregate into their respective daughter cells. Because this event is most prevalent during anaphase, the term anaphase bridge is often used as a substitute. After the formation of individual daughter cells, the DNA bridge connecting homologous chromosomes remains fixed. As the daughter cells exit mitosis and re-enter interphase, the chromatin bridge becomes known as an interphase bridge. These phenomena are usually visualized using the laboratory techniques of staining and fluorescence microscopy.\n\nThe faithful inheritance of genetic information from one cellular generation to the next heavily relies on the duplication of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), as well as the formation of two identical daughter cells. This complicated cellular process, known as mitosis, depends on a multitude of cellular checkpoints, signals, interactions and signal cascades for accurate and faithful functioning. Cancer, characterized by uncontrollable cell growth mechanisms and high tendencies for proliferation and metastasis, is highly prone to mitotic mistakes. As a result, several forms of chromosomal aberrations occur, including, but not limited to, binucleated cells, multipolar spindles and micronuclei. Chromatin bridges may serve as a marker of cancer activity. \n\nChromatin bridges may form by any number of processes wherein chromosomes remain topologically entangled during mitosis. One way in which this may occur is the failure to resolve joint molecules formed during homologous recombination mediated DNA repair, a process that ensures that replicated chromosomes are intact before chromosomes are segregated during cell division. In particular, genetic studies have demonstrated that the loss of the enzymes BLM (Bloom's Syndrome Helicase) or FANCM each result in a dramatic increase in the number of chromatin bridges. This occurs because loss of these genes causes an increase in chromosome fusions, either in an end-to-end manner or through topological entrapment (e.g., catenation or unresolved DNA cross-links), have also been associated with chromatin bridge formation. When viewed under a fluorescence microscope and immunostained for cytological markers, these chromatin bridges appear to emanate from either centromeres, telomeres or DNA crosslinks (as marked by FANCD2).\n\nChromatin bridges can be viewed utilizing a laboratory technique known as fluorescence microscopy. Fluorescence is the process that involves excitation of a fluorophore (a molecule with the ability to emit fluorescent light in the visible light spectrum) using ultraviolet light. After the fluorophore becomes chemically excited by the presence of UV light, it emits visible light at a specific wavelength, producing different colors. Fluorophores may be added as a molecular tag to different portions of a cell. DAPI is a fluorophore that specifically binds to DNA and fluoresces blue. In addition, immunofluorescence may be used as a laboratory technique to tag cells with specific fluorophores using antibodies, immune proteins created by B lymphocytes. Antibodies are utilized by the immune system in the identification and binding of foreign substances. Tubulin is a monomer of microtubules that compose the cellular cytoskeleton. The antibody anti-tubulin specifically binds to these tubulin monomeric subunits. A fluorophore can be chemically attached to the anti-tubulin antibody, which then fluoresces green. Numerous antibodies may bind to microtubules in order to amplify the fluorescent signal. Fluorescence microscopy allows for the observation of different components of the cell against a dark background for high intensity and specificity.\n\nChromatin bridges are easiest and most readily visible when observing chromosomes stained with DAPI. DNA bridges appear to be a blue, “string-like” connection between two separated daughter cells. This effect is created when sticky ends of chromosomes remain connected to one another, even after mitosis. A chromatin bridge may also be observed using indirect immunofluorescence, in which anti-tubulin emits a green coloration when bound to microtubules in the presence of UV light. Because microtubules maintain the positions of the chromosomes during mitosis, they appear to be densely pinched between the two dividing, daughter cells. Chromatin bridges can be difficult to locate utilizing fluorescence microscopy, as this phenomenon is not incredibly abundant and tend to appear faint against the dark background.\n\nRecently, chromatin bridges have been implied as a diagnostic marker for cancer, while having been linked to tumorigenesis in humans. This premise is based on the fact that as the mitotic cell divides and the daughter cells move further apart, stress on the DNA bridge leads to breakages in the chromosome at random points. As previously stated, the disruptions in the chromosome may lead to single chromosome mutations, including deletion, duplication and inversion, among others. This instability, defined as frequent changes in chromosomal structure and number, may be the basis of the development of cancer. While the frequency of chromatin bridges may be greater in tumor cells relative to normal cells, it may not be practical to utilize this phenomenon as a diagnostic tool. The process of staining and mounting sample cells using indirect immunofluorescence is time consuming. Even though DAPI staining is quick, neither laboratory technique can guarantee the presence of the bridges under the fluorescence microscope. The rarity of chromatin bridges, even in cancerous cells, makes this phenomenon difficult to be widely accepted diagnostic marker for cancer.\n", "id": "33231480", "title": "Chromatin bridge"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6611632", "text": "Buffer P2\n\nBuffer P2 is a lysis buffer solution produced by Qiagen. It contains sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) to puncture holes in cellular membranes. It is used in conjunction with other resuspension buffers and lysis buffers to release DNA from cells, often as part of the alkaline lysis method of purifying plasmid DNA from bacterial cell culture.\n", "id": "6611632", "title": "Buffer P2"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1006356", "text": "Creode\n\nCreode or chreod is a neologistic portmanteau term coined by the English 20th century biologist C.H. Waddington to represent the developmental pathway followed by a cell as it grows to form part of a specialized organ. Combining the Greek roots for \"necessary\" and \"path,\" the term was inspired by the property of regulation. When development is disturbed by external forces, the embryo attempts to regulate its growth and differentiation by returning to its normal developmental trajectory.\n\nWaddington used the term along with canalisation and homeorhesis, which describes a system that returns to a steady trajectory, in contrast to homeostasis, which describes a system which returns to a steady state. Waddington explains development with the metaphor of a ball rolling down a hillside, where the hill's contours channel the ball in a particular direction. In the case of a pathway or creode which is deeply carved in the hillside, external disturbance is unlikely to prevent normal development. He notes that creodes tend to have steeper sides earlier in development, when external disturbance rarely suffices to alter the developmental trajectory. Small differences in placement atop the hill can lead to dramatically different results by the time the ball reaches the bottom. This represents the tendency of neighboring regions of the early embryo to develop into different organs with radically different structures. Since intermediate structures rarely exist between organs, each ball that rolls down the hill is \"canalised\" to a region distinct from other regions, just as an eye, for instance, is distinct from an ear.\n\nWaddington refers to the network of creodes carved into the hillside as an \"epigenetic landscape,\" meaning that the formation of the body depends on not only its genetic makeup but the different ways genes are expressed in different regions of the embryo. He expands his metaphor by describing the underside of the epigenetic landscape. Here we see that the \"landscape\" is really more like a giant sheet that would blow away except that a series of tension-bearing cables holds it down. The pegs that connect the cables to the ground are the genes. The cables themselves are the epigenetic factors that influence gene expression in various regions of the embryo. The depth and direction of the channels is thus determined by a combination of genetic makeup and the epigenetic feedback loops by which genes are regulated.\n\nWhile Waddington does assert that the process of development is genetically driven, he makes no attempt to explain how this works and even offers evidence to the contrary. He observes, for instance, that genes ordinarily determine peripheral traits, such as eye color, rather than \"focal\" traits, such as the structure of the eye itself. Moreover, when genetic mutation influences basic structures, the result tends to be the complete transformation of a structure into another rather than piecemeal change, which Waddington illustrates with the developmental ball rolling out of one creode into another. Thus his account gives the impression that genes influence development, perhaps altering the course of a region of cells, without determining the endpoints toward which the embryo develops.\n\nThis interpretation is further reinforced by Waddington's discussion of the organization of the gene pool, where he points out that \"the epigenetic process occurring during the development of the organism might be so buffered or canalized that the optimum end-result is produced irrespective of the genes which the individual contains.\" The more deeply creodes are carved into the epigenetic landscape, the weaker the influence of genes over development. He also argues that deep creodes will resist not only genetic but environmental pressures to change course. This phenomenon, which he calls \"stabilizing selection,\" puts genes and environment on a par in secondary importance compared to the epigenetic system.\n\nWaddington's emphasis on epigenetics over genes prefigured the current interest in evolutionary developmental biology. As Sean B. Carroll and others have explained, genes involved in development are roughly the same in all animal species, from insect to primate. Instead of mutations in developmental genes, evolution has been driven by changes in gene expression, namely which genes are expressed at which times and locations in the developing organism.\n\nArchitectural theorist Sanford Kwinter described the concept of the chreod as \"the most important concept of the 20th century.\" The word \"chreod\" also closely describes paths of decision within what Christopher Alexander has called configuration space, his term for what he notes that Stuart Kaufmann calls \"fitness landscape.\" By Alexander's theory, because conscious human design decisions do not need to follow these chreods, conscious human design can lead to mixed results. Therefore, he proposes that discovering ways to allow architecture to follow these paths is the best way to get good results in the built environment. Alexander sees his theories of \"The Fundamental Process\", \"structure preserving transformations\" and \"15 fundamental properties\" which he outlines in his work \"The Nature of Order\" as instrumentally shaping paths through configuration space.\n\n\n", "id": "1006356", "title": "Creode"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23021180", "text": "Osmotic dehydration\n\nOsmotic dehydration is an operation used for the partial removal of water from plant tissues by immersion in a hyper-tonic (osmotic) solution.\n\nWater removal is based on the natural and non-destructive phenomenon of osmosis across cell membranes. The driving force for the diffusion of water from the tissue into the solution is provided by the higher osmotic pressure of the hyper-tonic solution. The diffusion of water is accompanied by the simultaneous counter diffusion of solutes from the osmotic solution into the tissue. Since the cell membrane responsible for osmotic transport is not perfectly selective, solutes present in the cells (organic acids, reducing sugars, minerals, flavors and pigment compounds) can also be leached into the osmotic solution, which affect the organoleptic and nutritional characteristics of the product.\n\nThe rate of diffusion of water from any material made up of such tissues depends upon factors such as temperature and concentration of the osmotic solution, the size and geometry of the material, the solution-to-material mass ratio and, to a certain level, agitation of the solution.\n", "id": "23021180", "title": "Osmotic dehydration"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33838036", "text": "Autophosphorylation\n\nAutophosphorylation is a type of post-translational modification of proteins. It is generally defined as the phosphorylation of the kinase by itself. In eukaryotes, this process occurs by the addition of a phosphate group to serine, threonine or tyrosine residues within protein kinases, normally to regulate the catalytic activity. \nAutophosphorylation may occur when a kinases' own active site catalyzes the phosphorylation reaction (cis autophosphorylation), or when another kinase of the same type provides the active site that carries out the chemistry (trans autophosphorylation). The latter often occurs when kinase molecules dimerize. In general, the phosphate groups introduced are gamma phosphates from nucleoside triphosphates, most commonly ATP.\n\nProtein kinases, many of which are regulated by autophosphorylation, are vital in controlling the cellular proliferation, differentiation, metabolism, migration and survival. Mutations in the genes encoding them or their potential activators or repressors can affect any number of functions within an organism. \nPhosphorylation is easily reversed by phosphatases. Therefore, it is an effective method of turning 'on' and 'off' kinase activity. Because of this it is recognized as an essential process in cell signaling. \nAddition of a negatively charged phosphate group brings about a change in the microenvironment that may lead to attraction or repulsion of other residues or molecules. The result may be a conformational change to expose or hide catalytic or allosteric seats from the surface. \nIf the phosphorylated residue resides within the catalytic seat itself, it may facilitate or prevent substrate binding by means of charge-interaction, or by providing or preventing complementary shapes necessary for molecular recognition. In addition, the phosphate group yields several potential areas for hydrogen-bonding or establishment of salt-bridges, of which the latter generally involves an arginine residue. \nBinding of effector molecules may be affected in a similar manner if the phosphorylated residue makes part of the allosteric site. \nAutophosphorylation has also been reported to have an effect on the cell's ability for endocytosis and proteolysis.\n\nKinases are either phosphorylated on serine and/or threonine residues, or solely on tyrosine residues. This serves as a means to classify them as either Ser/Thr- or Tyr-kinases. \nSeveral residues within the primary structure may be autophosphorylated simultaneously. The phosphoacceptors often reside within loops in the protein structure suitably termed 'activation loops'. The structures of some autophosphorylation complexes are known from crystals of protein kinases in which the phosphorylation site (Ser, Thr, or Tyr) of one monomer in the crystal is sitting in the active site of another monomer of the crystal in a manner similar to known peptide-substrate/kinase structures. The known structures include:\n\n\nIn general, the structures of the phosphorylation of internal loops involve important domain-domain contacts that have been confirmed by site-directed mutagenesis, while the phosphorylation of positions in the N or C terminal tails more than 10 amino acids away from the kinase domain do not involve important domain-domain contacts away from the substrate binding site.\n\nAmong a number of various molecules, Receptor Tyrosine Kinases (RTKs ) play a critical role in transducing signals through a range of signaling pathways. All RTKs consists of an extracellular ligand binding region, a single transmembrane helix and a cytoplasmic region (the tyrosine kinase domain). Prior to ligand stimulation most RTKs present as a monomer on the surface of cells. Ligand binding to the extracellular domain induces dimerization. Dimerization of RTKs leads to autophosphorylation of tyrosine in the catalytic core of the dimer, and finally stimulation of the tyrosine kinase activity and cell signaling. It is thus an example of a trans-autophosphorylation reaction, where one receptor subunit of the dimer phosphorylates the other subunit.\n\nAn example of RTKs that undergo autophosphorylation is the Epidermal Growth Factor receptor (EGFR ). EGFR was the first discovered example of RTKs. Following ligand binding, a conformational change occurs in the EGFR monomers. This leads to EGFR dimerization. Dimerization brings the two receptors into close proximity. This stimulates the kinase activity of EGFR, which leads to transautophosphorylation on multiple tyrosine residues in C-terminal end of the molecule. The phosphorylated tyrosine residue can then serve as a docking site for downstream signaling proteins. (Fig. 1).\n\nAnother example is the binding of insulin to insulin receptors. Once released into the bloodstream insulin can bind to receptors on the surface of cells in muscle or other tissues. This receptor is a protein with an (αβ)2 quaternary structure. The two large α-subunits are extracellular, while the smaller β-subunits have a transmembrane domain as well as extra-and intracellular domains. In the absence of insulin, the two intracellular domains of the β subunits are separated. Binding with insulin triggers a conformational change in the receptor that brings them closer together (dimerization). Each β subunit intracellular domain is a tyrosine kinase that phosphorylates its partner in the receptor.\n\nThe Src-family kinases are examples of proteins that utilize autophosphorylation to sustain their activated states. Src kinases are involved in intracellular signaling pathways that influence cell growth and cell adhesion strength. The latter contributes to the control of cell migration. In this way, src-kinase deregulation can enhance tumor growth and invasive potential of cancer cells. The activity of src kinases is regulated by both phosphorylation and intramolecular interactions involving the SH2 and SH3 domains. \nThe probable activation mechanism of src kinase in cancer is as follows:\n\nATM kinase, a member of the PI3-like family of serine/threonine kinases plays a critical role in maintaining the stability of the genome, which is of fundamental importance to the survival of all organisms. It exerts its effect by phosphorylating target proteins such as P53, MDM2 and chk2. Activation of ATM is facilitated by autophosphorylation. The inactive ATM exists as dimer, where the kinase domain of one monomer is bound to the internal domain of the other monomer, containing ser-1981. It will therefore be inaccessible to cellular substrates. In response to DNA damage, the kinase domain of one monomer phosphorylates ser-1981 of the other interacting ATM, resulting in subunit dissociation and ATM activation. The activated ATM triggers a sequence of events including cell cycle arrest which allows time for the repair of the damaged DNA. If damaged DNA is left unrepaired, it can lead to cell death or genomic instability, cancer and other pathologies.\n\n", "id": "33838036", "title": "Autophosphorylation"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1537176", "text": "Intercellular adhesion molecule\n\nIn molecular biology, intercellular adhesion molecules (ICAMs) and vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1) are part of the immunoglobulin superfamily. They are important in inflammation, immune responses and in intracellular signalling events. The ICAM family consists of five members, designated ICAM-1 to ICAM-5. They are known to bind to leucocyte integrins CD11/CD18 such as LFA-1 and Macrophage-1 antigen, during inflammation and in immune responses. In addition, ICAMs may exist in soluble forms in human plasma, due to activation and proteolysis mechanisms at cell surfaces.\n\nMammalian intercellular adhesion molecules include:\n", "id": "1537176", "title": "Intercellular adhesion molecule"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34086352", "text": "DNA re-replication\n\nDNA re-replication (or simply rereplication) is an undesirable and possibly fatal occurrence in eukaryotic cells in which the genome is replicated more than once per cell cycle. Rereplication is believed to lead to genomic instability and has been implicated in the pathologies of a variety of human cancers. To prevent rereplication, eukaryotic cells have evolved multiple, overlapping mechanisms to inhibit chromosomal DNA from being partially or fully rereplicated in a given cell cycle. These control mechanisms rely on cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) activity. DNA replication control mechanisms cooperate to prevent the relicensing of replication origins and to activate cell cycle and DNA damage checkpoints. DNA rereplication must be strictly regulated to ensure that genomic information is faithfully transmitted through successive generations.\n\nAll known mechanisms that prevent DNA rereplication in eukaryotic organisms inhibit origin licensing. Origin licensing is the preliminary step for normal replication initiation during late G1 and early S phase and involves the recruitment of the pre-replicative complex (pre-RC) to the replication origins. Licensing begins with the binding of the multi-subunit ATPase, the origin recognition complex (ORC), to the DNA at the replication origins. Once bound to chromatin the ORC recruits the AAA+ ATPase Cdc6 and the coiled-coil domain protein Cdt1. Cdt1 binding and the ATPase activity of ORC and Cdc6 facilitate the loading of the minichromosome maintenance (MCM) proteins 2-7 onto the chromatin. The MCM complex is the DNA helicase that opens the helix at the replication origin and unwinds the two strands as the replication forks travel along the DNA. Elevated CDK activity at the end of G1 triggers the firing of the origins and the dismantling of the pre-RCs. High CDK levels, which are maintained until the end of mitosis, inhibit or destroy pre-RC components and prevent the origin from relicensing. A new MCM complex cannot be loaded onto the origin until the pre-RC subunits are reactivated with the decline of CDK activity at the end of mitosis. Thus, CDKs serve a dual role in the regulation of eukaryotic DNA replication: elevated CDK activity initiates replication at the origins and prevents rereplication by inhibiting origin re-licensing. This ensures that no replication origin fires twice in the same cell cycle.\n\nEarly experimental evidence on the regulation of DNA replication suggests that replication origins exist in one of two states during the cell cycle: a prereplicative state in G1 and a postreplicative state from the moment of initiation until passage through mitosis. Origins of replication alternate between these two distinct states during the cell cycle. A licensing factor which is required for replication initiation binds to origins in the prereplicative state. At the G1/S transition, the factor is inactivated and cannot be restored until the cell cycle has concluded. The identification and characterization of the ORC, Cdc6, Cdt1, and the MCM complex proteins as the licensing factor gives credence to this model and suggests a means by which the oscillatory nature of CDKs in the cell cycle can regulate rereplication.\n\nRereplication regulation is best understood in budding yeast. \"Saccharomyces cerevisiae\" cells prevent rereplication by directly regulating pre-RC assembly through the CDK-mediated phosphorylation of the pre-RC components Cdc6, MCM2-7, and the ORC subunits. The phosphorylation of these components is initiated at the onset of S phase and is maintained throughout the rest of the cell cycle as CDK activity remains high. Phosphorylated Cdc6 is bound by the ubiquitin-protein ligase SCF which leads to its proteolytic degradation. CDK-dependent phosphorylation of the MCM2-7 proteins results in the complex’s export from the nucleus. (Cdt1 which associates with the MCM complex is similarly exported from the nucleus). Phosphorylation of the ORC subunits presumably disrupts the ORC’s ability to bind other pre-RC components. Thus, multiple mechanisms ensure that the pre-RC cannot be reassembled on postreplicative origins.\n\nNote: Since origins fire at different times throughout S phase, it is crucial that the inhibitory mechanisms that prevent new MCM2-7 recruitment do not destabilize existing pre-RCs. Pre-RCs can remain assembled on origins that haven’t fired even though rereplication inhibitory mechanisms are inhibiting or destroying pre-RC components.\n\nAlthough CDK regulation of pre-RC assembly appears to be highly evolutionarily conserved, some differences across organisms are noted. In multicellular eukaryotes pre-RC assembly is regulated by the anaphase-promoting complex (APC) in addition to CDKs. APC, an E3 enzyme, ubiquitinates the protein geminin and targets it for degradation. Geminin normally prevents origin licensing by binding to and inhibiting Cdt1. In G1, APC activity is adequate to suppress the accumulation of geminin, thereby indirectly promoting pre-RC assembly. At the end of G1, APC is inactivated and geminin can accumulate and prevent origin re-licensing.\n\nPre-RC regulation in most animals is not well understood.\n\nRereplication and mitotic failure are generally not programmed events, but rather result spontaneously from defects in the cell cycle machinery. Rereplication appears to give rise to dsDNA breaks which triggers a DNA damage response and arrests cells in G2. The checkpoint effectively causes a permanent cell cycle arrest and eventual apoptosis.\n\nRereplication can be experimentally induced by simultaneously disrupting several of the mechanisms that prevent origin re-licensing. For example, deregulation of the ORC, MCM2-7 and Cdc6 mechanisms can induce rereplication in budding yeast cells.\n\nNote: Recent evidence suggests that although overlapping, the multiple replication regulation mechanisms should not be considered as functionally redundant; although a single mechanism may repress rereplication at greater than 99% efficiency, it may not be sufficient to maintain genome stability over many generations. Instead, it is believed that the multiplicative effect of many overlapping mechanisms is what sufficiently prevents rereplication and ensures the faithful transmission of a cell’s genome.\n\nRereplication has been implicated in tumorigenesis in model organisms and humans. Replication initiation proteins are overexpressed in tissue samples from several types of human cancers and experimental overexpression of Cdt1 and Cdc6 can cause tumor development in mouse cells. Further, these studies indicate that rereplication can result in an increase in aneuploidy, chromosomal fusions, and DNA breaks. A thorough understanding of the regulatory replication mechanisms is important for the development of novel cancer treatments.\n\nFor the special case of cell cycle-regulated DNA replication in which DNA synthesis is uncoupled from cell cycle progression refer to endoreduplication.\n", "id": "34086352", "title": "DNA re-replication"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33921940", "text": "Dendrite (non-neuronal)\n\nA dendrite is a branching projection of the cytoplasm of a cell. While the term is most commonly used to refer to the branching projections of neurons, it can also be used to refer to features of other types of cells that, while having a similar appearance, are actually quite distinct structures.\n\nNon-neuronal cells that have dendrites:\n", "id": "33921940", "title": "Dendrite (non-neuronal)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21400587", "text": "History of cell membrane theory\n\nCell theory has its origins in seventeenth century microscopy observations, but it would be nearly two hundred years before a complete cell membrane theory be developed to explain what separates cells from the outside world. By the 19th century it was accepted that some form of semi-permeable barrier must exist around a cell. Studies of the action of anesthetic molecules led to the theory that this barrier might be made of some sort of fat (lipid), but the structure was still unknown. A series of pioneering experiments in 1925 indicated that this barrier membrane consisted of two molecular layers of lipids—a lipid bilayer. New tools over the next few decades would confirm this theory, but controversy remained regarding the role of proteins in the cell membrane. Eventually the fluid mosaic model was composed in which proteins “float” in a fluid lipid bilayer \"sea\". Although simplistic and incomplete, this model is still widely referenced today.\n\nSince the invention of the microscope in the seventeenth century it has been known that plant and animal tissue is composed of cells : the cell was discovered by Robert Hooke. The plant cell wall was easily visible even with these early microscopes but no similar barrier was visible on animal cells, though it stood to reason that one must exist. By the mid 19th century, this question was being actively investigated and Moritz Traube noted that this outer layer must be semipermeable to allow transport of ions. Traube had no direct evidence for the composition of this film, though, and incorrectly asserted that it was formed by an interfacial reaction of the cell protoplasm with the extracellular fluid.\n\nThe lipid nature of the cell membrane was first correctly intuited by Quincke, who noted that a cell generally forms a spherical shape in water and, when broken in half, forms two smaller spheres. The only other known material to exhibit this behavior was oil. He also noted that a thin film of oil behaves as a semipermeable membrane, precisely as predicted. Based on these observations, Quincke asserted that the cell membrane comprised a fluid layer of fat less than 100 nm thick. This theory was further extended by evidence from the study of anesthetics. Hans Meyer and Ernest Overton independently noticed that the chemicals which act as general anesthetics are also those soluble in both water and oil. They interpreted this as meaning that to pass the cell membrane a molecule must be at least sparingly soluble in oil, their “lipoid theory of narcosis.” Based on this evidence and further experiments, they concluded that the cell membrane might be made of lecithin (phosphatidylcholine) and cholesterol. Interestingly, one of the early criticisms of this theory was that it included no mechanism for energy-dependent selective transport. This “flaw” would remain unanswered for nearly half a century until the discovery that specialized molecules called integral membrane proteins can act as ion transportation pumps.\n\nThus, by the early twentieth century the chemical, but not the structural nature of the cell membrane was known. Two experiments in 1924 laid the groundwork to fill in this gap. By measuring the capacitance of erythrocyte solutions Fricke determined that the cell membrane was 3.3 nm thick. Although the results of this experiment were accurate, Fricke misinterpreted the data to mean that the cell membrane is a single molecular layer. Because the polar lipid headgroups are fully hydrated, they do not show up in a capacitance measurement meaning that this experiment actually measured the thickness of the hydrocarbon core, not the whole bilayer. Gorter and Grendel approached the problem from a different perspective, performing a solvent extraction of erythrocyte lipids and spreading the resulting material as a monolayer on a Langmuir-Blodgett trough. When they compared the area of the monolayer to the surface area of the cells, they found a ratio of two to one. Later analyses of this experiment showed several problems including an incorrect monolayer pressure, incomplete lipid extraction and a miscalculation of cell surface area. In spite of these issues the fundamental conclusion- that the cell membrane is a lipid bilayer- was correct.\n\nA decade later, Davson and Danielli proposed a modification to this concept. In their model, the lipid bilayer was coated on either side with a layer of globular proteins. According to their view, this protein coat had no particular structure and was simply formed by adsorption from solution. Their theory was also incorrect in that it ascribed the barrier properties of the membrane to electrostatic repulsion from the protein layer rather than the energetic cost of crossing the hydrophobic core. A more direct investigation of the membrane was made possible through the use of electron microscopy in the late 1950s. After staining with heavy metal labels, Sjöstrand et al. noted two thin dark bands separated by a light region, which they incorrectly interpreted as a single molecular layer of protein. A more accurate interpretation was made by J. David Robertson, who determined that the dark electron-dense bands were the headgroups and associated proteins of two apposed lipid monolayers. In this body of work, Robertson put forward the concept of the “unit membrane.” This was the first time the bilayer structure had been universally assigned to all cell membranes as well as organelle membranes.\n\nThe idea of a semipermeable membrane, a barrier that is permeable to solvent but impermeable to solute molecules was developed at about the same time. The term osmosis originated in 1827 and its importance to physiological phenomena realized, but it was not until 1877 when the botanist Pfeffer proposed the membrane theory of cell physiology. In this view, the cell was seen to be enclosed by a thin surface, the plasma membrane, and cell water and solutes such as a potassium ion existed in a physical state like that of a dilute solution. In 1889, Hamburger used hemolysis of erythrocytes to determine the permeability of various solutes. By measuring the time required for the cells to swell past their elastic limit, the rate at which solutes entered the cells could be estimated by the accompanying change in cell volume. He also found that there was an apparent nonsolvent volume of about 50% in red blood cells and later showed that this includes water of hydration in addition to the protein and other nonsolvent components of the cells.\nOverton (a distant cousin of Charles Darwin) first proposed the concept of a lipid (oil) plasma membrane in 1899. The major weakness of the lipid membrane was the lack of an explanation of the high permeability to water, so Nathansohn (1904) proposed the mosaic theory. In this view, the membrane is not a pure lipid layer, but a mosaic of areas with lipid and areas with semipermeable gel. Ruhland refined the mosaic theory to include pores to allow additional passage of small molecules. Since membranes are generally less permeable to anions, Leonor Michaelis concluded that ions are adsorbed to the walls of the pores, changing the permeability of the pores to ions by electrostatic repulsion. Michaelis demonstrated the membrane potential (1926) and proposed that it was related to the distribution of ions across the membrane. Harvey and Danielli (1939) proposed a lipid bilayer membrane covered on each side with a layer of protein to account for measurements of surface tension. In 1941 Boyle & Conway showed that the membrane of resting frog muscle was permeable to both K+ and Cl-, but apparently not to Na+, so the idea of electrical charges in the pores was unnecessary since a single critical pore size would explain the permeability to K+ , H+, and Cl- as well as the impermeability to Na+, Ca+, and Mg++.\n\nWith the development of radioactive tracers, it was shown that cells are not impermeable to Na+. This was difficult to explain with the membrane barrier theory, so the sodium pump was proposed to continually remove Na+ as it permeates cells. This drove the concept that cells are in a state of dynamic equilibrium, constantly using energy to maintain ion gradients. In 1935, Karl Lohmann discovered ATP and its role as a source of energy for cells, so the concept of a metabolically-driven sodium pump was proposed.\nThe tremendous success of Hodgkin, Huxley, and Katz in the development of the membrane theory of cellular membrane potentials, with differential equations that modeled the phenomena correctly, provided even more support for the membrane pump hypothesis.\n\nThe modern view of the plasma membrane is of a fluid lipid bilayer that has protein components embedded within it. The structure of the membrane is now known in great detail, including 3D models of many of the hundreds of different proteins that are bound to the membrane.\nThese major developments in cell physiology placed the membrane theory in a position of dominance.\n\nAround the same time the development of the first model membrane, the painted bilayer, allowed direct investigation of the properties of a simple artificial bilayer. By “painting” a reconstituted lipid solution across an aperture, Mueller and Rudin were able to determine that the resulting bilayer exhibited lateral fluidity, high electrical resistance and self-healing in response to puncture. This form of model bilayer soon became known as a “BLM” although from the beginning the meaning of this acronym has been ambiguous. As early as 1966, BLM was used to mean either “black lipid membrane” or \"bimolecular lipid membrane\".\n\nThis same lateral fluidity was first demonstrated conclusively on the cell surface by Frye and Edidin in 1970. They fused two cells labeled with different membrane-bound fluorescent tags and watched as the two dye populations mixed. The results of this experiment were key in the development of the \"fluid mosaic\" model of the cell membrane by Singer and Nicolson in 1972. According to this model, biological membranes are composed largely of bare lipid bilayer with proteins penetrating either half way or all the way through the membrane. These proteins are visualized as freely floating within a completely liquid bilayer. This was not the first proposal of a heterogeneous membrane structure. Indeed, as early as 1904 Nathansohn proposed a “mosaic” of water permeable and impermeable regions. But the fluid mosaic model was the first to correctly incorporate fluidity, membrane channels and multiple modes of protein/bilayer coupling into one theory.\n\nContinued research has revealed some shortcomings and simplifications in the original theory. For instance, channel proteins are described as having a continuous water channel through their center, which is now known to be generally untrue (an exception being nuclear pore complexes, which have a 9 nm open water channel). Also, free diffusion on the cell surface is often limited to areas a few tens of nanometers across. These limits to lateral fluidity are due to cytoskeleton anchors, lipid phase separation and aggregated protein structures. Contemporary studies also indicate that much less of the plasma membrane is “bare” lipid than previously thought and in fact much of the cell surface may be protein-associated. In spite of these limitations, the fluid mosaic model remains a popular and often referenced general notion for the structure of biological membranes.\n\nThe modern mainstream consensus model of cellular membranes is based on the fluid-mosaic model that envisions a lipid bilayer separating the inside from the outside of cells with associated ion channels, pumps and transporters giving rise to the permeability processes of cells. Alternative hypotheses were developed in the past that have largely been rejected. One of these opposing concepts developed early within the context of studies on osmosis, permeability, and electrical properties of cells was that of Gilbert Ling. The modern idea holds that these properties all belonged to the plasma membrane whereas Ling's view was that the protoplasm was responsible for these properties.\n\nAs support for the lipid bilayer membrane theory grew, this alternative concept was developed which denied the importance of the lipid bilayer membrane. Procter & Wilson (1916) demonstrated that gels, which do not have a semipermeable membrane, would swell in dilute solutions. Loeb (1920) also studied gelatin extensively, with and without a membrane, showing that more of the properties attributed to the plasma membrane could be duplicated in gels without a membrane. In particular, he found that an electrical potential difference between the gelatin and the outside medium could be developed, based on the H+ concentration.\n\nSome criticisms of the membrane theory developed in the 1930s, based on observations such as the ability of some cells to swell and increase their surface area by a factor of 1000. A lipid layer cannot stretch to that extent without becoming a patchwork (thereby losing its barrier properties). Such criticisms stimulated continued studies on protoplasm as the principal agent determining cell permeability properties. In 1938, Fischer and Suer proposed that water in the protoplasm is not free but in a chemically combined form, and that the protoplasm represents a combination of protein, salt and water. They demonstrated the basic similarity between swelling in living tissues and the swelling of gelatin and fibrin gels. Dimitri Nasonov (1944) viewed proteins as the central components responsible for many properties of the cell, including electrical properties.\n\nBy the 1940s, the bulk phase theories were not as well developed as the membrane theories and were largely rejected. In 1941, Brooks & Brooks published a monograph The Permeability of Living Cells, which rejects the bulk phase theories.\n\n\n", "id": "21400587", "title": "History of cell membrane theory"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34422673", "text": "Walter Nelson-Rees\n\nWalter Nelson-Rees (11 January 1929 – 23 January 2009) was a cell culture worker and cytogeneticist who helped expose the problem of cross-contamination of cell lines. He used chromosome banding to show that many immortal cell lines, previously thought to be unique, were actually HeLa cell lines. The HeLa cells had contaminated and overgrown the other cell lines.\n\nHe was born on January 11, 1929. Nelson-Rees retired in 1980. In 2005 he received the Lifetime Achievement Award, from the Society for In Vitro Biology (SIVB).\n\nHe died on January 23, 2009 in San Francisco, California from complications from a broken hip.\n", "id": "34422673", "title": "Walter Nelson-Rees"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8936239", "text": "Aggresome\n\nIn eukaryotic cells, an aggresome refers to an aggregation of misfolded proteins in the cell, formed when the protein-degradation system of the cell is overwhelmed. Aggresome formation is a highly regulated process which possibly serves to organize misfolded proteins into a single location.\n\nCorrect folding requires proteins to assume one particular structure from a constellation of possible but incorrect conformations. The failure of polypeptides to adopt their proper structure is a major threat to cell function and viability. Consequently, elaborate systems have evolved to protect cells from the deleterious effects of misfolded proteins.\n\nCells mainly deploy three mechanisms to counteract misfolded proteins: up-regulating chaperones to assist protein refolding, proteolytic degradation of the misfolded/damaged proteins involving ubiquitin–proteasome and autophagy–lysosome systems, and formation of detergent-insoluble aggresomes by transporting the misfolded proteins along microtubules to a region near the nucleus. Intracellular deposition of misfolded protein aggregates into ubiquitin-rich cytoplasmic inclusions is linked to the pathogenesis of many diseases. Functional blockade of either degradative system leads to an enhanced aggresome formation. Why these aggregates form despite the existence of cellular machinery to recognize and degrade misfolded protein, and how they are delivered to cytoplasmic inclusions, are not known.\n\nAggresome formation is accompanied by redistribution of the intermediate filament protein vimentin to form a cage surrounding a pericentriolar core of aggregated, ubiquitinated protein. Disruption of microtubules blocks the formation of aggresomes. Similarly, inhibition of proteasome function also prevents the degradation of unassembled presenilin-1 molecules leading to their aggregation and deposition in aggresomes. Aggresome formation is a general response of cells which occurs when the capacity of the proteasome is exceeded by the production of aggregation-prone misfolded proteins.\n\nTypically, an aggresome forms in response to a cellular stress which generates a large amount of misfolded or partially denatured protein: hyperthermia, overexpression of an insoluble or mutant protein, etc. The formation of the aggresome is largely believed to be a protective response, sequestering potentially cytotoxic aggregates and also acting as a staging center for eventual autophagic clearance from the cell.\n\nAn aggresome forms around the microtubule organizing center in eukaryotic cells, adjacent to or enveloping the cell's centrosomes. Polyubiquitination tags the protein for retrograde transport via HDAC6 binding and microtubule-based motor protein, dynein. Moreover, substrates can also be targeted to the aggresome by a ubiquitin-independent pathway mediated by the stress-induced co-chaperone BAG3 (Bcl-2-associated athanogene 3), which transfers misfolded protein substrates bound to HSP70 (heat-shock protein 70) directly on to the microtubule motor dynein. The protein aggregate is then transported along the microtubule and unloaded via p97 forming the aggresome. Mediators such as p62 are believed to be involved in aggresome formation in sequestering omega-somes, which bind and increase the size of the aggresome. The aggresome is eventually targeted for autophagic clearance for the cell. Some pathological proteins, such as alpha-synuclein, cannot be degraded and cause the aggresomes to form inclusion bodies (in Parkinsons Disease, Lewy bodies) which contribute to neuronal dysfunction and death.\n\nAbnormal polypeptides that escape proteasome-dependent degradation and aggregate in cytosol can be transported via microtubules to an aggresome, a recently discovered organelle where aggregated proteins are stored or degraded by autophagy. Synphilin 1, a protein implicated in Parkinson disease,was used as a model to study mechanisms of aggresome formation. When expressed in naïve HEK293 cells, synphilin 1 forms multiple small highly mobile aggregates. However, proteasome or Hsp90 inhibition rapidly triggered their translocation into the aggresome, and surprisingly, this response was independent on the expression level of synphilin 1. Therefore, aggresome formation, but not aggregation of synphilin 1, represents a special cellular response to a failure of the proteasome/chaperone machinery. Importantly, translocation to aggresomes required a special aggresome-targeting signal within the sequence of synphilin 1, an ankyrin-like repeat domain. On the other hand, formation of multiple small aggregates required an entirely different segment within synphilin 1, indicating that aggregation and aggresome formation determinants can be separated genetically. Furthermore, substitution of the ankyrin-like repeat in synphilin 1 with an aggresome-targeting signal from huntingtin was sufficient for aggresome formation upon inhibition of the proteasome. Analogously, attachment of the ankyrin-like repeat to a huntingtin fragment lacking its aggresome-targeting signal promoted its transport to aggresomes. These findings indicate the existence of transferable signals that target aggregation-prone polypeptides to aggresomes.\n\nAccumulation of misfolded proteins in proteinaceous inclusions is common to many age-related neurodegenerative diseases, including Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease, Huntington's disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. In cultured cells, when the production of misfolded proteins exceeds the capacity of the chaperone refolding system and the ubiquitin-proteasome degradation pathway, misfolded proteins are actively transported to a cytoplasmic juxtanuclear structure called an aggresome. Whether aggresomes are benevolent or noxious is unknown, but they are of particular interest because of the appearance of similar inclusions in protein deposition diseases. Evidence shows that aggresomes serve a cytoprotective function and are associated with accelerated turnover of mutant proteins. Experiments show that mutant androgen receptor (AR), the protein responsible for X-linked spinobulbar muscular atrophy, forms insoluble aggregates and is toxic to cultured cells. Mutant AR was also found to form aggresomes in a process distinct from aggregation. Molecular and pharmacological interventions were used to disrupt aggresome formation, revealing their cytoprotective function. Aggresome-forming proteins were found to have an accelerated rate of turnover, and this turnover was slowed by inhibition of aggresome formation. Finally, it is shown that aggresome-forming proteins become membrane-bound and associate with lysosomal structures. Together, these findings suggest that aggresomes are cytoprotective, serving as cytoplasmic recruitment centers to facilitate degradation of toxic proteins.\n\nHistone deacetylase 6 is the protein that, in the deacetylase adaptor protein function, forms Lewy bodies (the regular wild-type protein localized to inclusion bodies). No mutation associated with disease has been linked to this protein.\n\nParkin is the protein that, in the protein ligase function, forms Lewy bodies (the regular wild-type protein localized to inclusion bodies). Parkinson's disease has been linked to this protein when there is a protein.\n\nAtaxin-3 is the protein that, in the deubiquitinating enzyme function, forms SCA type-1 and 2 DRPLA intranuclear inclusions (the regular wild-type protein localized to inclusion bodies). SCA type-3 has been linked to this protein when there is a protein.\n\nDynein motor complex is the protein that, in the retrograde microtubule motor function, forms an unknown protein (the regular wild-type protein localized to inclusion bodies). Motor neuron degeneration has been linked to this protein when there is a protein.\n\nUbiquilin-1 is the protein that, in the protein turnover, intracellular trafficking function, forms Lewy bodies and neurofibrillary tangles (the regular wild-type protein localized to inclusion bodies). Alzheimer’s disease (potential risk factor) has been linked to this protein when there is a protein.\n\nCystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) is an inefficiently folded integral membrane protein that is degraded by the cytoplasmic ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Overexpression or inhibition of proteasome activity in transfected human embryonic kidney or Chinese hamster ovary cells leads to the accumulation of stable, high molecular weight, detergent-insoluble, multi-ubiquitinated forms of CFTR. Undergraded CFTR molecules accumulate at a distinct pericentriolar aggresome.\n\nThere is emerging evidence that inhibiting the aggresome pathway leads to accumulation of misfolded proteins and apoptosis in tumor cells through autophagy.\n\n\n", "id": "8936239", "title": "Aggresome"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34854833", "text": "Karyosome\n\nKaryosome refers to the chromatin material inside cell nucleus when the cell is not undergoing mitotic division.\n", "id": "34854833", "title": "Karyosome"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34699334", "text": "Myoneme\n\nA myoneme (or spasmoneme) is a contractile structure found in some eukaryotic single-celled organisms, particularly \"Vorticella\". It consists of a series of protein filaments that shorten rapidly upon exposure to calcium. Although the shortening can be up to 100 lengths per second, faster than any muscle, the relaxation time is several seconds (compared to approximately one tenth of a second for muscle). The myonemes of Acantharea also display slow contraction and undulation movements.\n", "id": "34699334", "title": "Myoneme"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35060092", "text": "Reverse migration (immunology)\n\nReverse migration is the phenomena in which some neutrophils migrate away from the inflammation site, against the chemokine gradient, during inflammation resolution. The activation of \"in vivo\" inflammatory pathways (such as hypoxia-inducible factor, HIF), altered this behavior of reverse migration.\n", "id": "35060092", "title": "Reverse migration (immunology)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32791702", "text": "Methanobactin\n\nMethanobactin (mb) is a class of Mcopper-binding and reducing uchromophoric peptides initially identified in the methanotroph \"Methylococcus capsulatus\" Bath - and later in \"Methylosinus trichosporium\" OB3b - during the isolation of the membrane-associated or particulate methane monooxygenase (pMMO). It is thought to be secreted to the extracellular media to recruit copper, a critical component of methane monooxygenase, the first enzyme in the series that catalyzes the oxidation of methane into methanol. Methanobactin functions as a chalkophore, similar to iron siderophores, by binding to Cu(II) or Cu(I) then shuttling the copper into the cell. Methanobactin has an extremely high affinity for binding and Cu(I) with a Kd approximating ~10 M at pH 8. \nAdditionally, methanobactin can reduce Cu(II), which is toxic to cells, to Cu(I), the form used in pMMO. Moreover, different species of methanobactin are hypothesized to be ubiquitous within the biosphere, especially in light of the discovery of molecules produced by other type II methanotrophs that similarly bind and reduce copper (II) to copper (I).\n\nMethanobactin OB3b is a commonly studied methanobactin. It has a molecular weight of 1154Da when metal free. OB3b is composed of 9 amino acid residues with two oxazolone rings, which take part in binding to copper ions. The oxazalone rings are susceptible to cleavage under low pH conditions, which releases any metal ion bound to the rings. Copper is bound and reduced at a tetradentate binding site composed of 2 oxazolone rings and 2 modified enethiol groups. In particular, the origin and function of these oxazolone rings in methanobactin OB3b has been the subject of research, since these domains appear unique.\n\nRecently, it has been suggested that mb OB3b is derived from a small, ribsomally-produced peptide precursor with the sequence of L-C-G-S-C-Y-P-C-S-C-M. Functional mbOB3b is composed of (isobutyl group)-(Oxazolone ring A)-G-S-C-Y-(Oxazolone ring B)-S-M. (Note that some specimens of mBOB3b are found without the C-terminal methionine and appear fully functional.) \nIt has been argued that the chromophoric rings of this particular species of methanobactin enable mbOB3b to bind and reduce other metals. For example, mbOB3b can reduce Ag(I) to Ag(0), Au(III) to Au(0), Cr(VI) to Cr(III), and Hg(II) to Hg(I); it is also able to bind Co(II), Zn (II), Mn(II), Pb(II), and U(IV). Because of this, it is possible that methanobactin may have several medical and environmental applications as a metal chelator and reducing agent.\n\nThe mechanism of metal reduction is currently undetermined. It has been shown that the tetradentate binding configuration of copper (I) in mbOB3b necessitates the ligation of a water molecule to the copper ion as a ligand. This has been used to argue for water the source of electrons for reducing the bound metal ion. Others have suggested that the disulfide bridge in methanobactin's structure is the source of the electron, though XPS has shown that this bond is still intact in copper-bound methanobactin. The source of this reducing electron remains elusive at the moment.\n\nMethanobactin SB2 is produced by \"Methylocystis\" bacteria. SB2 is much smaller than OB3b with a molecular weight of 851Da when metal free. SB2 contains one imidazole ring and one oxazalone ring as well as a sulfate group that are thought to partake in binding copper.\n", "id": "32791702", "title": "Methanobactin"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35351239", "text": "Signaling Gateway (website)\n\nSignaling Gateway is a web portal dedicated to signaling pathways powered by the San Diego Supercomputer Center at the University of California, San Diego. It was initiated by a collaboration between the Alliance for Cellular Signaling and Nature. A primary feature is the Molecule Pages database.\n\nSignaling Gateway Molecule Pages is a database containing \"essential information on more than 8000 mammalian proteins (Mouse and Human) involved in cellular signaling.\"\n\nThe content of molecule pages is authored by invited experts and is peer-reviewed. The published pages are citable by digital object identifiers (DOIs). All data in the Molecule Pages are freely available to the public.\n\nData can be exported to PDF, XML, BioPAX/SBPAX and SBML.\n\nMIRIAM Registry Details.\n\n\n", "id": "35351239", "title": "Signaling Gateway (website)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35435442", "text": "GPCR oligomer\n\nA GPCR oligomer is a protein complex that consists of a small number ( \"oligoi\" \"a few\", \"méros\" \"part, piece, component\") of G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs). It is held together by covalent bonds or by intermolecular forces. The subunits within this complex are called protomers, while unconnected receptors are called monomers. Receptor homomers consist of identical protomers, while heteromers consist of different protomers.\n\nReceptor homodimers – which consist of two identical GPCRs – are the simplest homomeric GPCR oligomers. Receptor heterodimers – which consist of two different GPCRs – are the simplest heteromeric GPCR oligomers.\n\nThe existence of receptor oligomers is a general phenomenon, whose discovery has superseded the prevailing paradigmatic concept of the function of receptors as plain monomers, and has far-reaching implications for the understanding of neurobiological diseases as well as for the development of drugs.\n\nFor a long time it was assumed that receptors transmitted their effects exclusively from their basic functional forms – as monomers. The first clue to the existence of GPCR oligomers goes back to 1975 when Robert Lefkowitz observed that β-adrenoceptors display negative binding cooperativity. At the beginning of the 1980s, it was hypothesized, receptors could form larger complexes, the so-called mosaic form, where two receptors may interact directly with each other. Mass determination of β-adrenoceptors (1982) and muscarinic receptors (1983), supported the existence of homodimer or tetrameric complexes. In 1991, the phenomenon of receptor crosstalk was observed between adenosine A (A2A) and dopamine D receptor (DRD2) thus suggesting the formation of heteromers. While initially thought to be a receptor heterodimer, a review from 2015 determined that the A2A-DRD2 heteromer is a heterotetramer composed of A2A and DRD2 homodimers (i.e., two adenosine A2A receptors and two dopamine D2 receptors). Maggio and co-workers showed in 1993 the ability of the muscarinic M receptor and α2C-adrenoceptor to heterodimerize. The first direct evidence that GPCRs functioned as oligomers \"in vivo\" came from Overton and Blumer in 2000 by fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) analysis of the α-factor receptor in the yeast \"Saccharomyces cerevisiae\". In 2005, further evidence was provided that receptor oligomizeration plays a functional role in a living organism with regulatory implication. The crystal structure of the CXCR4 dimer was published in 2010.\n\nGPCR oligomers consist of receptor dimers, trimers, tetramers, and complexes of higher order. These oligomers are entities with properties that can differ from those of the monomers in several ways. The functional character of a receptor is dependent on its tertiary or quaternary structure. Within the complex protomers act as allosteric modulators of another. This has consequences for:\n\n\nThere are various methods to detect and observe GPCR oligomers.\n\n\n\n", "id": "35435442", "title": "GPCR oligomer"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=376924", "text": "Cleavage furrow\n\nIn cell biology, the cleavage furrow is the indentation of the cell's surface that begins the progression of cleavage, by which animal and some algal cells undergo cytokinesis, the final splitting of the membrane, in the process of cell division. The same proteins responsible for muscle contraction, actin and myosin, begin the process of forming the cleavage furrow, creating an actomyosin ring. Other cytoskeletal proteins and actin binding proteins are involved in the procedure.\n\nPlant cells do not perform cytokinesis through this exact method but the two procedures are not totally different. Animal cells form an actin-myosin contractile ring within the equatorial region of the cell membrane that constricts to form the cleavage furrow. In plant cells, Golgi vesicle secretions form a cell plate or septum on the equatorial plane of the cell wall by the action of microtubules of the phragmoplast. The cleavage furrow in animal cells and the phragmoplast in plant cells are complex structures made up of microtubules and microfilaments that aide in the final separation of the cells into two identical daughter cells.\n\nThe cell cycle begins with interphase when the DNA replicates, the cell grows and prepares to enter mitosis. Mitosis includes four phases, prophase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase. Prophase is the initial phase when spindle fibers appear that function to move the chromosomes toward opposite poles. This spindle apparatus consists of microtubules, microfilaments and a complex network of various proteins. During metaphase, the chromosomes line up using the spindle apparatus in the middle of the cell along the equatorial plate. The chromosomes move to opposite poles during anaphase and remain attached to the spindle fibers by their centromeres. Animal cell cleavage furrow formation is caused by a ring of actin microfilaments called the contractile ring, which forms during early anaphase. Myosin is present in the region of the contractile ring as concentrated microfilaments and actin filaments are predominant in this region. The actin filaments here are both pre-existing and new. Cleavage is driven by these motor proteins, actin and myosin, which are the same proteins involved with muscle contraction. During cellular cleavage, the contractile ring tightens around the cytoplasm of the cell until the cytoplasm is pinched into two daughter cells. During the final phase of mitosis, telophase, the furrow forms an intercellular bridge using mitotic spindle fibers. Phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) has been shown to be present during this time which indicates that is may play a role in movement between the plasma membrane and contractile ring. The bridge is then broken and resealed to form two identical daughter cells during cytokinesis. The breakage is formed by microtubules and the resealing is negated by Calcium dependent exocytosis using Golgi vesicles. In comparison, the plant cell septum and the animal cell mid-zone are analogous. Both require vesicular secretions by the Golgi apparatus for resealing and formation of the cytoskeletal network in addition to microtubules and microfilaments for division and movement. The cleavage furrow mechanism in animal cells is a complex network of actin and myosin filaments, Golgi vesicles and Calcium dependent channels enabling the cell to break apart, reseal and form new daughter cells with complete membranes.\n\n", "id": "376924", "title": "Cleavage furrow"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35552831", "text": "Ciliogenesis\n\nCiliogenesis is defined as the building of the cell's antenna (primary cilia) or extracellular fluid mediation mechanism (motile cilium). It includes the assembly and disassembly of the cilia during the cell cycle. Cilia are important organelles of cells and are involved in numerous activities such as cell signaling, processing developmental signals, and directing the flow of fluids such as mucus over and around cells. Due to the importance of these cell processes, defects in ciliogenesis can lead to numerous human diseases related to non-functioning cilia. Ciliogenesis may also play a role in the development of left/right handedness in humans.\n\nCiliogenesis occurs through an ordered set of steps. First, the basal bodies from centrioles must migrate to the surface of the cell and attach to the cortex. Along the way, the basal bodies attach to membrane vesicles and the basal body/membrane vesicle complex fuses with the plasma membrane of the cell. Fusion with the plasma membrane is likely what forms the membrane of the cilia. The alignment of the forming cilia is determined by the original positioning and orientation of the basal bodies. Once the alignment is determined, axonemal microtubules extend from the basal body and go beneath the developing ciliary membrane, forming the cilia.\n\nProteins must be synthesized in the cytoplasm of the cell and cannot be synthesized within cilia. For the cilium to elongate, proteins must be selectively imported from the cytoplasm into the cilium and transported to the tip of the cilium by intraflagellar transport (IFT). Once the cilium is completely formed, it continues to incorporate new tubulin at the tip of the cilia. However, the cilium does not elongate further, because older tubulin is simultaneously degraded. This requires an active mechanism that maintains ciliary length. Impairments in these mechanisms can affect the motility of the cell and cell signaling between cells.\n\nMost cilia (also known as flagella) form as a separate compartment in the cell and the process is named Compartmentalized ciliogenesis. However, the flagellum, a particular type of cilium found in the sperm is formed in a unique way, which is named Cytosolic ciliogenesis (also known as Cytoplasmic ciliogenesis), since, in this type of ciliogenesis, the cilium axoneme is formed in the cytoplasm or get exposed to the cytoplasm.\n\nCiliary defects can lead to a broad range of human diseases known as ciliopathies that are caused by mutations in ciliary proteins. Some common ciliopathies include primary ciliary dyskinesia, hydrocephalus, polycystic liver and kidney disease, and some forms of retinal degeneration. Some research has shown that mutations in ciliary proteins can lead to other developmental and adult phenotypes such as nephronophthisis, Bardet-Biedl syndrome, Alstrom syndrome, and Meckel-Gruber syndrome.\n\nDifferent cells use their cilia for different purposes, such as sensory signaling or the movement of fluid. For this reason, when cilia form and how long they are differ from cell to cell. The processes controlling ciliary formation, degradation, and length must all be regulated in some way to ensure that each cell is able to perform its necessary tasks.\n\nAs the cell containing the cilium goes through the cell cycle, ciliogenesis must be regulated. Cilia usually form during the G1 of the cell cycle and disassemble during mitosis. It is not known why the cilia assemble and then disassemble, but it is believed that the presence of cilia may interfere with mitosis and, therefore, are removed before mitosis occurs.\n\nCells that have recently divided and are in the G0 stage of the cell cycle do not have cilia. During G1, the mother centriole attaches at the cell cortex and forms the cilium. During S-phase, the mother centrioles and daughter centrioles (new centrioles) duplicate and new daughter centrioles are formed. Before mitosis can occur in most cells, the cilium is resorbed back into the cell. After the original cell divides into its two new cells, the cilia reform within the cells after the new cells enter G1.\n\nEach type of cell has a specific optimal length for its cilia. Therefore, the length of the cilia must be regulated to ensure optimal function of the cell. Some of the same processes that are used to control to formation and removal of cilia (such as IFT) are thought to be used in the regulation of cilia length. The regulation of ciliary length is very important because it affects how the cell is able to use its cilia to move fluid over its surface or conduct cellular signaling. Different ciliopathies can be caused by defects in ciliary length. For instance, proteins that have been shown to cause Meckel–Gruber syndrome affect ciliary length control. However, the mechanisms that affect ciliary length control are not understood very well. Until they are, it will be difficult to determine how defects in ciliary length may related to ciliopathic diseases and syndromes.\n", "id": "35552831", "title": "Ciliogenesis"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35544190", "text": "Glitter cell\n\nGlitter cells are neutrophils that are found in the urine, most commonly associated with urinary tract infections and pyelonephritis. They derive their name from their appearance when viewed on a wet mount preparation under a microscope; the granules within their cytoplasm can be seen moving, giving them a \"glittering appearance.\"\n", "id": "35544190", "title": "Glitter cell"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3760179", "text": "Mutation frequency\n\nMutation frequency and mutation rates are highly correlated to each other. Mutation frequencies test are cost effective in laboratories however; these two concepts provide vital information in reference to accounting for the emergence of mutations on any given germ line. \n\nThere are several test utilized in measuring the chances of mutation frequency and rates occurring in a particular gene pool. Some of the test are as follows:\n\nMutation frequency and rates provide vital information about how often a mutation may be expressed in a particular genetic group or sex.\nThere are additional factors affecting mutation frequency and rates involving evolutionary influences. Since, organisms may pass mutations to their offspring incorporating and analyzing the mutation frequency and rates of a particular species may provide a means to adequately comprehend its longevity \n", "id": "3760179", "title": "Mutation frequency"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15876400", "text": "Calcium chloride transformation\n\nCalcium chloride (CaCl) transformation is a laboratory technique in prokaryotic (bacterial) cell biology. It increases the ability of a prokaryotic cell to incorporate plasmid DNA allowing them to be genetically transformed. The addition of calcium chloride to a cell suspension promotes the binding of plasmid DNA to lipopolysaccharides (LPS). Positively charged calcium ions attract both the negatively charged DNA backbone and the negatively charged groups in the LPS inner core. The plasmid DNA can then pass into the cell upon heat shock, where chilled cells (+4 degrees Celsius) are heated to a higher temperature (+42 degrees Celsius) for a short time.\n\n", "id": "15876400", "title": "Calcium chloride transformation"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21590012", "text": "Cytosis\n\nCytosis is a transport mechanism for the movement of large quantities of molecules into and out of cells.\n\nThere are three main types of cytosis: endocytosis (into the cell), exocytosis (out of the cell), and transcytosis (through the cell, in and out).\n\nThe word \"cytosis\" () uses combining forms of \"cyto-\" and \"-osis\", reflecting a cellular process. The term was coined by Novikoff in 1961.\n\nEndocytosis is when a cell absorbs molecules, such as proteins, from outside the cell by engulfing it with the cell membrane. It is used by most cells, because many critical substances are large polar molecules that cannot pass through the cell membrane. The two major types of endocytosis are pinocytosis and phagocytosis.\n\n\n\n\nExocytosis is when a cell directs the contents of secretory vesicles out of the cell membrane. The vesicles fuse with the cell membrane and their content, usually protein, is released out of the cell. There are two types of exocytosis: Constitutive secretion and Regulated secretion. In both of these types, a vesicle buds from the Golgi Apparatus and are shuttled to the plasma membrane to be exocytosed from the cell. Exocytosis of lysosomes commonly serves to repair damaged areas of the plasma membrane by replenishing the lipid bi-layer.\n\n\n\nTranscytosis is a type of cytosis that allows particles to be shuttled from one membrane to another. An example of this would be when a receptor normally lies on the basal or lateral membrane of an epithelial cell, but needs to be trafficked to the apical side. This can only be done through transcytosis due to tight junctions, which prevent movement from one plasma membrane domain to another. This type of cytosis occurs commonly in epithelium, intestinal cells, and blood capillaries. Transcytosis can also be taken advantage of by pathogenic molecules and organisms. Several studies have shown that bacterium can easily enter intestinal lumen through transcytosis of goblet cells. Other studies, however, are exploring the idea that transcytosis may play a role in allowing medications to cross the blood-brain barrier. Exploiting this fact may allow certain drug therapies to be better utilized by the brain.\n\nMethods of cytosis not only move substances in, out of, and through cells, but also add and subtract membrane from the cell's plasma membrane. The surface area of the membrane is determined by the balance of the two mechanisms and contributes to the homeostatic environment of the cell.\n\n", "id": "21590012", "title": "Cytosis"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=512863", "text": "Microbody\n\nA microbody is a type of organelle that is found in the cells of plants, protozoa, and animals. Organelles in the microbody family include peroxisomes, glyoxysomes, glycosomes and hydrogenosomes. In vertebrates, microbodies are especially prevalent in the liver and kidney organs.\n\nA microbody is usually a vesicle with a spherical shape, ranging from 0.2-1.5 micrometers in diameter. Microbodies are found in the cytoplasm of a cell, but they are only visible with the use of an electron microscope. They are surrounded by a single phospholipid bilayer membrane and they contain a matrix of intracellular material including enzymes and other proteins, but they do not seem to contain any genetic material to allow them to self-replicate.\n\nMicrobodies contain enzymes that participate in the preparatory or intermediate stages of biochemical reactions within the cell. This facilitates the breakdown of fats, alcohols and amino acids. Generally microbodies are involved in detoxification of peroxides and in photo respiration in plants. Different types of microbodies have different functions:\n\nA peroxisome is a type of microbody that functions to help the body break down large molecules and detoxify hazardous substances. It contains enzymes like oxidase, which can create hydrogen peroxide as a byproduct of its enzymatic reactions. Within the peroxisome, hydrogen peroxide can then be converted to water by enzymes like catalase and peroxidase.\n\nGlyoxysomes are specialized peroxisomes found in plants and mold, which help to convert stored lipids into carbohydrates so they can be used for plant growth. In glyoxysomes the fatty acids are hydrolyzed to acetyl-CoA by peroxisomal β-oxidation enzymes. Besides peroxisomal functions, glyoxysomes also possess the key enzymes of the Glyoxylate cycle.\n\nMicrobodies were first discovered and named in 1954 by Rhodin. Two years later in 1956, Rouiller and Bernhard presented the first worldwide accepted images of microbodies in liver cells. Then in 1965, Christian de Duve and coworkers isolated microbodies from the liver of a rat. De Duve also believed that the name Microbody was too general and chose the name of Peroxisome because of its relationship with hydrogen peroxide. In 1967, Breidenbach and Beevers were the first to isolate microbodies from plants, which they named Glyoxysomes because they were found to contain enzymes of the Glyoxylate cycle.\n\n", "id": "512863", "title": "Microbody"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36204496", "text": "Hypothallus\n\nThe hypothallus is a hat-like layer on true slime molds, the myxogastria, on which the fruit body is sitting and which displays the connection of the fruit body to the underground. Roughly translated it means \"under the thallus\".\n\nThe hypothallus is produced by the plasmodium at the beginning of the fructification. Depending on the species, it can be membranous to thick or tender to solid and nearly transparent to radiant coloured. It is either shaped isolated as an edge of single fruit bodies or as a permanent layer, which connects the edges of numerous fruit bodies. In some but rarely cases it is missing entirely.\n\nDepending on the taxon, it is directly involved in the further fruiting of the fruit body: the Stemonitida is caused by the so-called \"epihypothallic\". Here, the hypothallus becomes a hollow, tubelike stem (and in consequence also a columella); this trinity produces a morphologic object. On the stem or the columella rises the remaining plasmodium and produces a separate structure, which carries the spores.\n\nOn all other myxogastria, however, a \"subhypothallic\" development takes place. Here, the hypothallus produces a layer on the plasmodium, which creates the rooms of the single fruit bodies during fruiting. As the surrounding plasmodium flows in the fruit body, the hypothallus will lie directly on the substrate, shrinks and creates the edge of the mature fruit body. The hypothallus is here part of a morphologic unit with peridium and stem, which serves as a membranous surface of the whole structure with the spores.\n\nThe epihypothaly is an autapomorphy of the stemonitida and is, compared with the subhypothaly, a primitive feature.\n", "id": "36204496", "title": "Hypothallus"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36190447", "text": "Kinetic-segregation model of T cell activation\n\nKinetic-segregation model of T-cell activation is one of the TCR signaling models. It offers an explanation for how TCR binding to its ligand triggers T-cell activation, based on size-sensitivity for the molecules involved. Simon J. Davis and Anton van der Merwe, University of Oxford, proposed this model in 1996. Kinetic-segregation model was originally used to elucidate how binding of TCR to peptide-MHC-complex on APC is communicated across the T-cell membrane resulting in T-cell activation. However, its authors suggest it might be also applied to CD28 triggering by superagonistic antibodies (mitogenic antibodies).\n\nTCR signals by stimulating tyrosine phosphorylation. In the resting T-cell, the molecules involved in this process are repeatedly colliding by means of diffusion. The TCR/CD3 complex is constantly being phosphorylated by Lck (membrane associated tyrosine kinase) and in turn continuously dephosphorylated by CD45 (tyrosine phosphatase). It all happens in a random manner and as a result the overall phosphorylation of TCR is low. T-cell activation does not proceed.\nThe TCR/peptide-MHC complex, formed when a T-cell recognizes its ligand and the T-cell-APC contact occurs, spans a short length. As the authors propose, this forms small zones of close contact, from which the inhibitory CD45 phosphatase molecules with ectodomains too large to fit in are excluded.\nCD148 is another large-ectodomain phosphatase excluded from the close-contact zone.\nCD45 steric exclusion extends the phosphorylation half-lives of TCR/peptide-MHC complexes, which are trapped within the close-contact zone. Such prolonged phosphorylation of ITAMs by Lck kinase allows time for ZAP-70 recruitment, its activation by phosphorylation and subsequent phosphorylation of adaptor proteins LAT and SLP-76, all known as downstream signaling steps. Full T-cell activation is initiated by multiple triggering events described above. When T-cell and APC membranes separate, the close-contact zone vanishes and large-ectodomain tyrosine phosphatases are allowed to restore the ground state.\n\nPhosphorylation of TCR/CD3 complexes that entered the close-contact zone but did not bind their peptide-MHC ligand is too short-lived to induce signaling because they rapidly diffuse out of the segregation zone back to the vicinity of inhibitory tyrosine phosphatases. Unbound complexes are not held in the zone of contact interface and do not trigger T-cell activation.\n\nIn the resting T-cell there is no net phosphorylation of CD28 (one of the molecules providing co-stimulatory signals required for T-cell activation). Kinetic-segregation model uses here the same explanation as it provides for low net phosphorylation of TCR in the resting T-cell described previously.\n\nBinding of both conventional and superagonistic (mitogenic) antibodies in suspension does not constrict the dephosphorylation effect of phosphatases acting on CD28. However, when these antibodies are immobilized (either by secondary antibody bound to plastic or by Fc receptors on other cells) considerable steric constraints emerge. It is of note, that the immobilized conventional antibody poses less prominent spatial constraints than the immobilized superagonistic antibody. CD45 phosphatase is not completely excluded from the close-contact zone and thus the signal generated in the case of a conventional antibody is weaker. Immobilized superagonistic antibodies bound to CD28 exclude CD45 phosphatases completely and the signal leading to T-cell activation is stronger.\n\nThe tyrosine kinase Lck functions either in conjunction with a co-receptor molecule (CD4 or CD8) or as a free Lck kinase. The kinetic-segregation model might be applied to both co-receptor dependent and co-receptor independent signaling through TCR.\n\nAccording to the primary mechanism they propose for signal transduction and the fate of TCR/CD3 complex in T-cell triggering, the TCR signaling models might be divided into three basic categories. They are classified as aggregation models, conformational change models and segregation models. These models are not strictly mutually exclusive and T-cell triggering may actually combine various mechanisms.\n\nAggregation models propose that the aggregation of TCR/CD3 upon binding a ligand results in the proximity of tyrosine kinases, leading to ITAM phosphorylation necessary for further signal transduction.\n\nIn general, conformational change models postulate that binding of peptide-MHC alters TCR/CD3 complex by exerting a mechanical pulling force. This is supposed to result in conformational changes in the cytoplasmic tails of CD3 molecules, thus resulting in signal transduction.\n\nKinetic segregation model proposing size-based exclusion of inhibitory molecules from the contact site is not the only segregation model suggested for T-cell activation. Lipid raft association model suggests that segregation of TCR/CD3 complexes in lipid rafts enriched in Lck tyrosine kinases and other signaling molecules and depleted of CD45 tyrosine phosphatases might provide an environment favoring TCR triggering.\n", "id": "36190447", "title": "Kinetic-segregation model of T cell activation"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36466699", "text": "CellCognition\n\nCellCognition is a free open-source computational framework for quantitative analysis of high-throughput fluorescence microscopy (time-lapse) images in the field of bioimage informatics and systems microscopy. The CellCognition framework uses image processing, computer vision and machine learning techniques for single-cell tracking and classification of cell morphologies. This enables measurements of temporal progression of cell phases, modeling of cellular dynamics and generation of phenotype map.\n\nCellCognition uses a computational pipeline which includes image segmentation, object detection, feature extraction, statistical classification, tracking of individual cells over time, detection of class-transition motifs (e.g. cells entering mitosis), and HMM correction of classification errors on class labels.\n\nThe software is written in Python 2.7 and binaries are available for Windows and Mac OS X. \n\nCellCognition (Version 1.0.1) was first released in December 2009 by scientists from the Gerlich Lab and the Buhmann group at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zürich and the Ellenberg Lab at the European Molecular Biology Laboratory Heidelberg. The latest release is 1.6.1 and the software is developed and maintained by the Gerlich Lab at the Institute of Molecular Biotechnology.\n\nCellCognition has been used in RNAi-based screening, applied in basic cell cycle study, and extended to unsupervised modeling.\n\n", "id": "36466699", "title": "CellCognition"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36539588", "text": "Resin canal\n\nResin canals or resin ducts are elongated, tube-shaped intercellular spaces surrounded by epithelial cells which secrete resin into the canal. These canals are orientated longitudinally and radially in between fusiform rays. They are usually found in late wood: denser wood grown later in the season. Resin is antiseptic and aromatic and prevents the development of fungi and deters insects. \n\n\n\nResin canal characteristics (such as number, size and density) in pine species can determine its resistance to pests. In one study, biologists were able to categorize 84% of lodgepole pine, and 92% of limber pines, as being either susceptible or resistant to bark beetles based only on their resin canals and growth rate over 20 years. In another study, scientists found ponderosa pine trees that survived drought and bark beetle attacks had resin ducts that were >10% larger in diameter, >25% denser (resin canals per mm), and composed >50% more area of per ring.\n\nJohn G. Haygreen, Jim L. Bowyer: Forest products and wood sciences. Iowa State University Press, Ames, Iowa, 1996 (3rd ed.), \n", "id": "36539588", "title": "Resin canal"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19045237", "text": "Cytoneme\n\nCytonemes are thin, cellular projections that are specialized for exchange of signaling proteins between cells. Cytonemes emanate from cells that make signaling proteins, extending directly to cells that receive signaling proteins. Cytonemes also extend directly from cells that receive signaling proteins to cells that make them.\n\nA cytoneme is a type of filopodium - a thin, tubular extension of a cell’s plasma membrane that has a core composed of tightly bundled, parallel actin filaments. Filopodia can extend more than 100 μm and have been measured as thin as 0.1 μm and as thick as 0.5 μm. Cytonemes with a diameter of approximately 0.2 μm and as long as 80 μm have been observed in the Drosophila wing imaginal disc\n\nMany cell types have filopodia. The functions of filopodia have been attributed to pathfinding of neurons, early stages of synapse formation, antigen presentation by dendritic cells of the immune system, force generation by macrophages and virus transmission. They have been associated with wound closure, dorsal closure of Drosophila embryos, chemotaxis in Dictyostelium, Delta-Notch signaling, vasculogenesis, cell adhesion, cell migration, and cancer metastasis. Filopodia have been given various names: microspikes, pseudopods, thin filopodia, thick filopodia, gliopodia, myopodia, invadopodia, podosomes, telopodes, tunneling nanotubes and dendrites. The term cytoneme was coined to denote the presence of cytoplasm in their interior (cyto-) and their finger-like appearance (-neme), and to distinguish their role as signaling, rather than structural or force-generating, organelles.\n\nFilopodia with behaviors suggestive of roles in sensing patterning information were first observed in sea urchin embryos, and subsequent characterizations support the idea that they convey patterning signals between cells. The discovery of cytonemes in Drosophila imaginal discs correlated for the first time the presence and behavior of filopodia with a known morphogen signaling protein - Decapentaplegic. Decapentaplegic is expressed in the wing disc by cells that function as a developmental organizer, and cytonemes that are responsive to Decapentaplegic orient toward this developmental organizer. Receptors for signaling proteins are present in motile vesicles in cytonemes, and receptors for different signaling proteins segregate specifically to different types of cytonemes. In Drosophila, cytonemes have been found in wing and eye imaginal discs, trachea, lymph glands and ovaries. They have also been described in spider embryos, earwig ovaries, Rhodnius, Calpodes, earthworms, retroviral-infected cells, mast cells, B-lymphocytes and neutrophils. Recent obserrvations suggest that cytonemes have also an important role during vertebrate development. Recent observations suggest that cytonemes also have an important role during development of the zebrafish neural plate\n", "id": "19045237", "title": "Cytoneme"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37102865", "text": "Chemically induced dimerization\n\nChemically Induced Dimerization (CID) is a biological mechanism in which two proteins bind only in the presence of a certain small molecule, enzyme or other dimerizing agent. Genetically engineered CID systems are used in biological research to control protein localization, to manipulate signalling pathways and to induce protein activation. \n\nThe first small molecule CID system was developed in 1993 and used FK1012, a derivative of the drug tacrolimus (FK506), to induce homo-dimerization of FKBP. This system was used \"in vivo\" to induce binding between cell surface receptors which could not bind in the normal way because they lacked transmembrane and extracellular domain. Addition of FK1012 to the cells caused signal transduction.\n\nCID has been used for a number of applications in biomedical research. In most applications each dimerizing protein is expressed as part of a fusion construct with other proteins of interest. Adding the chemical dimerizing agent brings both construct into proximity with each other and therefore induces interaction between the proteins of interests. CID has been used to regulate and monitor gene transcription, signal transduction and post translational modifications in proteins.\n\nRecently, CID has also been used to create a basic component of biocomputers, logic gates, from genetically manipulated cells. In this application, two independent CID systems, one based on plant proteins and one based on bacterial proteins are expressed in the same cell. Each set of proteins can be induced to dimerize by the addition of a separate chemical. By creating fusion proteins with the dimerizing proteins, membrane bound proteins and proteins that activate cell ruffling an AND gate and OR gate can be created that take chemical dimerizing agents as inputs and returns a ruffled or unruffled state as output.\n", "id": "37102865", "title": "Chemically induced dimerization"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21965993", "text": "Stable cell\n\nIn cellular biology, Stable cells are cells that multiply only when needed. They spend most of the time in the quiescent G0 phase of the cell cycle, but can be stimulated to enter the cell cycle when needed. Examples include: the liver, the proximal tubules of the kidney, and endocrine glands.\n\n", "id": "21965993", "title": "Stable cell"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36845407", "text": "3D cell culturing by magnetic levitation\n\n3D cell culture by the magnetic levitation method (MLM) is the application of growing 3D tissue by inducing cells treated with magnetic nanoparticle assemblies in spatially varying magnetic fields using neodymium magnetic drivers and promoting cell to cell interactions by levitating the cells up to the air/liquid interface of a standard petri dish. The magnetic nanoparticle assemblies consist of magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles, gold nanoparticles, and the polymer polylysine. 3D cell culturing is scalable, with the capability for culturing 500 cells to millions of cells or from single dish to high-throughput low volume systems. Once magnetized cultures are generated, they can also be used as the building block material, or the \"ink\", for the magnetic 3D bioprinting process.\n\nStandard monolayer cell culturing on tissue culture plastic has notably improved our understanding of basic cell biology, but it does not replicate the complex 3D architecture of in vivo tissue, and it can significantly modify cell properties. This often compromises experiments in basic life science, leads to misleading drug-screening results on efficacy and toxicity, and produces cells that may lack the characteristics needed for developing tissue regeneration therapies.\n\nThe future of cell culturing for fundamental studies and biomedical applications lies in the creation of multicellular structure and organization in three-dimensions. Many schemes for 3D culturing are being developed or marketed, such as bio-reactors or protein-based gel environments.\n\nA 3D cell culturing system known as the Bio-Assembler™ uses biocompatible polymer-based reagents to deliver magnetic nanoparticles to individual cells so that an applied magnetic driver can levitate cells off the bottom of the cell culture dish and rapidly bring cells together near the air-liquid interface. This initiates cell-cell interactions in the absence of any artificial surface or matrix. Magnetic fields are designed to rapidly form 3D multicellular structures in as little as a few hours, including expression of extracellular matrix proteins. The morphology, protein expression, and response to exogenous agents of resulting tissue show great similarity to in vivo results.\n\n3D cell culturing by magnetic levitation method (MLM) was developed from collaboration between scientists at Rice University and University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center in 2008. Since then, this technology has been licensed and commercialized by Nano3D Biosciences.\n\nAbove is a picture showing 3D cell culturing through magnetic levitation with the Bio-Assembler cell culturing system. (A) A magnetic iron oxide nanoparticle assembly known as Nanoshuttle is added and dispersed over cells and the mixture is incubated. (B) After incubation with Nanoshuttle, cells are detached and transferred to a petri dish. (C) A magnetic drive is then placed on top of a petri dish top. (D) The magnetic field causes cells to rise to the air–medium interface. (E) Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) levitated for 60 minutes (left images) and 4 hours (right images) (Scale bar, 50 μm). The onset of cell-cell interaction takes place as soon as cells levitate, and 3D structures start to form. At 1 hour, the cells are still relatively dispersed, but they are already showing some signs of stretching. Formation of 3D structures is visible after 4 hours of levitation (arrows).\n\nProtein expression in levitated cultures shows striking similarity to in vivo patterns. N-cadherin expression in levitated human glioblastoma cells was identical to the expression seen in human tumor xenografts grown in immunodeficient mice, while standard 2D culture showed much weaker expression that did not match xenograft distribution as shown in the picture below. The transmembrane protein N-cadherin is often used as an indicator of in-vivo-like tissue assembly in 3D culturing.\n\nIn the picture above, distribution of N-cadherin (red) and nuclei (blue) in human brain cancer mouse xenograft (left, human brain cancer cells grown in a mouse brain), brain cancer cells cultured by 3D magnetic levitation for 48 h. (middle), and cells cultured on a glass slide cover slip (2D, right). The 2D system shows N-cadherin in the cytoplasm and nucleus and notably absent from the membrane, while in the levitated culture and mouse, N-cadherin is clearly concentrated in the membrane, and also present in cytoplasm and cell junctions.\n\nOne of the challenges in generating in vivo like cultures or tissue in vitro is the difficulty in co-culturing different cell types. Because of the ability of 3D cell culturing by magnetic levitation to bring cells together, co-culturing different cell types is possible. Co-culturing of different cell types can be achieved at the onset of levitation, by mixing different cell types in before levitation or by magnetically guiding 3D cultures in an invasion assay format.\n\nThe unique ability to manipulate cells and shape tissue magnetically offers new possibilities for controlled co-culturing and invasion assays. Co-culturing in a realistic tissue architecture is critical for accurately modeling in vivo conditions, such as for increasing the accuracy of cellular assays as shown in the figure below.\n\nShown in the picture above is an invasion assay of magnetically levitated multicellular spheroids. Fluorescence images of human glioblastoma (GBM) cells (green; GFP-expressing cells) and normal human astrocytes (NHA) (red; mCherry-labelled) cultured separately and then magnetically guided together (left, time 0). Invasion of GBM into NHAin 3D culture provides a powerful new assay for basic cancer biology and drug screening (right, 12h to 252h).\n\nBy facilitating assembly of different populations of cells using the MLM, consistent generation of organoids termed adipospheres capable of simulating the complex intercellular interactions of endogenous white adipose tissue (WAT) can be achieved.\n\nCo-culturing 3T3-L1 pre-adipocytes in 3D with murine endothelial bEND.3 cells creates a vascular-like network assembly with concomitant lipogenesis in perivascular cells. See figure below.\n\nIn addition to cell lines, WAT organogenesis can be simulated from primary cells.\n\nAdipocyte-depleted stromal vascular fraction (SVF) containing adipose stromal cells (ASC), endothelial cells, and infiltrating leukocyte derived from mouse white adipose tissue (WAT) were cultured in 3D. This revealed organoids striking in hierarchical organization with distinct capsule and internal large vessel-like structures lined with endothelial cells, as well as perivascular localization of ASC.\n\nUpon adipogenesis induction of either 3T3-L1 adipospheres or adipospheres derived from SVF, the cells efficiently formed large lipid droplets typical of white adipocytes in vivo, whereas only smaller lipid droplet formation is achievable in 2D. This indicates intercellular signaling that better recapitulates WAT organogenesis.\n\nThis MLM for 3D co-culturing creates adipospheres appropriate for WAT modeling ex vivo and provides a new platform for functional screens to identify molecules bioactive toward individual adipose cell populations. It can also be adopted for WAT transplantation applications and aid other approaches to WAT-based cell therapy.\n\nUsing the MagPen™ (a Nano3D Biosciences, Inc. product), organized 3D co-cultures similar to native tissue architecture can be rapidly created. Endothelial cells (PEC), smooth muscle cells (SMC), fibroblasts (PF), and epithelial cells (EpiC) cultured with the Bio-Assembler™ can be sequentially layered in a drag-and-drop manner to create bronchioles that maintain phenotype and induce extracellular matrix formation.\n\nListed below are the cell types (primary and cell lines) that have been successfully cultured by the magnetic levitation method. The second table is the same but with images included. More images are available at Nano3D Biosciences, Inc.\n\nSame table as above, but with images.\n", "id": "36845407", "title": "3D cell culturing by magnetic levitation"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10319792", "text": "Fragmentation (cell biology)\n\nIn cell biology, ways in which fragmentation is useful for a cell: DNA cloning and apoptosis. DNA cloning is important in asexual reproduction or creation of identical DNA molecules, and can be performed spontaneously by the cell or intentionally by laboratory researchers. Apoptosis is the programmed destruction of cells, and the DNA molecules within them, and is a highly regulated process. These two ways in which fragmentation is used in cellular processes describe normal cellular functions and common laboratory procedures performed with cells. However, problems within a cell can sometimes cause fragmentation that results in irregularities such as red blood cell fragmentation and sperm cell DNA fragmentation.\n\nDNA cloning can be performed spontaneously by the cell for reproductive purposes. This is a form of asexual reproduction where an organism splits into fragments and then each of these fragments develop into mature, fully grown individuals that are clones of the original organism (See reproductive fragmentation).\nDNA cloning can also be performed intentionally by laboratory researchers. Here, DNA fragmentation is a molecular genetic technique that permits researchers to use recombinant DNA technology to prepare large numbers of identical DNA molecules. \nIn order for DNA cloning to be completed, it is necessary to obtain discrete, small regions of an organism's DNA that constitute specific genes. Only relatively small DNA molecules can be cloned in any available vector. Therefore, the long DNA molecules that compose an organism's genome must be cleaved into fragments that can be inserted into the vector DNA. Two enzymes facilitate the production of such recombinant DNA molecules:\nThe key to cloning a DNA fragment is to link it to a vector DNA molecule that can replicate within a host cell. After a single recombinant DNA molecule (composed of a vector plus an inserted DNA fragment) is introduced into a host cell, the inserted DNA can be replicated along with the vector, generating a large number of identical DNA molecules.\nThe basic scheme for this can be summarized as follows:\n\nThere are numerous experimental variations to this scheme, but these steps are essential to DNA cloning in a laboratory.\n\nApoptosis refers to the demise of cells by a specific form of programmed cell death, characterized by a well-defined sequence of morphological changes. Cellular and nuclear shrinkage, chromatin condensation and fragmentation, formation of apoptotic bodies and phagocytosis by neighboring cells characterize the main morphological changes in the apoptosis process. Extensive morphological and biochemical changes during apoptosis ensure that dying cells leave minimal impact on neighboring cells and/or tissues. \nGenes involved in controlling cell death encode proteins with three distinct functions:\n\nThe cleavage of chromosomal DNA into smaller fragments is an integral part, and biochemical hallmark, of apoptosis. Apoptosis involves the activation of endonucleases with subsequent cleavage of chromatin DNA into fragments of 180 base pairs or multiples of 180 base pairs (e.g. 360, 540). This pattern of fragmentation can be used to detect apoptosis in tests such as a DNA laddering assay with gel electrophoresis, a TUNEL assay, or a Nicoletti assay.\nApoptotic DNA fragmentation relies on an enzyme called Caspase-Activated DNase (CAD). CAD is usually inhibited by another protein in the cell, called Inhibitor of caspase-activated DNase (ICAD). In order for apoptosis to begin, an enzyme called caspase 3 cleaves ICAD so that CAD becomes activated. CAD then cleaves the DNA between nucleosomes, which occur in chromatin at 180 base pair intervals. The sites between nucleosomes are the only parts of the DNA that are exposed and accessible to CAD.\n\nDNA fragmentation can occur under certain conditions in a few different cell types. This can lead to problems for a cell, or it may lead to a cell receiving a signal to undergo apoptosis. Below are a couple of examples of irregular fragmentation that can occur in cells.\n", "id": "10319792", "title": "Fragmentation (cell biology)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2823760", "text": "Tonicity\n\nTonicity is a measure of the effective osmotic pressure gradient, as defined by the water potential of two solutions separated by a semipermeable membrane. In other words, tonicity is the relative concentration of solutes dissolved in solution which determine the direction and extent of diffusion. It is commonly used when describing the response of cells immersed in an external solution.\n\nUnlike osmotic pressure, tonicity is influenced only by solutes that cannot cross the membrane, as only these exert an effective osmotic pressure. Solutes able to freely cross the membrane do not affect tonicity because they will always be in equal concentrations on both sides of the membrane. It is also a factor affecting imbibition.\n\nThere are three classifications of tonicity that one solution can have relative to another: \"hypertonic\", \"hypotonic\", and \"isotonic\".\n\nA hypertonic solution has a greater concentration of solutes than another solution. In biology, the tonicity of a solution usually refers to its solute concentration relative to that of another solution on the opposite side of a cell membrane; a solution outside of a cell is called hypertonic if it has a greater concentration of solutes than the cytosol inside the cell. When a cell is immersed in a hypertonic solution, osmotic pressure tends to force water to flow out of the cell in order to balance the concentrations of the solutes on either side of the cell membrane. The cytosol is conversely categorized as hypotonic, opposite of the outer solution.\n\nWhen plant cells are in a hypertonic solution, the flexible cell membrane pulls away from the rigid cell wall, but remains joined to the cell wall at points called plasmodesmata. The cells often take on the appearance of a pincushion, and the plasmodesmata almost cease to function because they become constricted, a condition known as plasmolysis. In plant cells the terms isotonic, hypotonic and hypertonic cannot strictly be used accurately because the pressure exerted by the cell wall significantly affects the osmotic equilibrium point.\n\nSome organisms have evolved intricate methods of circumventing hypertonicity. For example, saltwater is hypertonic to the fish that live in it. Because the fish need a large surface area in their gills in contact with seawater for gas exchange, they lose water osmotically to the sea from gill cells. They respond to the loss by drinking large amounts of saltwater, and actively excreting the excess salt. This process is called osmoregulation.\n\nA hypotonic solution has a lower concentration of solutes than another solution. In biology, a solution outside of a cell is called hypotonic if it has a lower concentration of solutes relative to the cytosol. Due to osmotic pressure, water diffuses into the cell, and the cell often appears turgid, or bloated.\nFor cells without a cell wall such as animal cells, if the gradient is large enough, the uptake of excess water can produce enough pressure to induce cytolysis, or rupturing of the cell.\nWhen plant cells are in a hypotonic solution, the central vacuole takes on extra water and pushes the cell membrane against the cell wall. Due to the rigidity of the cell wall, it pushes back, preventing the cell from bursting. This is called turgor pressure.\n\nA solution is isotonic when its effective osmole concentration is the same as that of another solution. In biology, the solutions on either side of a cell membrane are isotonic if the concentration of solutes outside the cell is equal to the concentration of solutes inside the cell. In this case the cell neither swells nor shrinks because there is no concentration gradient to induce the diffusion of large amounts of water across the cell membrane. Water molecules freely diffuse through the plasma membrane in both directions, and as the rate of water diffusion is the same in each direction, the cell will neither gain nor lose water.\n\nAn iso-osmolar solution can be hypotonic if the solute is able to penetrate the cell membrane. For example, an iso-osmolar urea solution is hypotonic to red blood cells, causing their lysis. This is due to urea entering the cell down its concentration gradient, followed by water. The osmolarity of normal saline, 9 grams NaCl dissolved in water to a total volume of one liter, is a close approximation to the osmolarity of NaCl in blood (about 290 mOsm/L). Thus, normal saline is almost isotonic to blood plasma. Neither sodium nor chloride ions can freely pass through the plasma membrane, unlike urea.\n\n", "id": "2823760", "title": "Tonicity"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37860179", "text": "Chaperone-mediated autophagy\n\nChaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA) refers to the chaperone-dependent selection of soluble cytosolic proteins that are then targeted to lysosomes and directly translocated across the lysosome membrane for degradation. The unique features of this type of autophagy are the selectivity on the proteins that are degraded by this pathway and the direct shuttling of these proteins across the lysosomal membrane without the requirement for the formation of additional vesicles (Figure 1). \n\nThe proteins that are degraded through CMA are cytosolic proteins or proteins from other compartments once they reach the cytosol. Therefore, some of the components that participate in CMA are present in the cytosol while others are located at the lysosomal membrane (Table I).\n\nIn one mechanism for a protein to be a CMA substrate, it must have in its amino acid sequence a pentapeptide motif biochemically related to KFERQ. This CMA-targeting motif is recognized by a cytosolic chaperone, heat shock cognate protein of 70 kDa (hsc70) which targets the substrate to the lysosome surface. This substrate protein-chaperone complex binds to lysosome-associated membrane protein type 2A (LAMP-2A), which acts as the receptor for this pathway. LAMP-2A a single span membrane protein, is one of the three spliced variants of a single gene \"lamp2\". The other two isoforms LAMP-2B and LAMP-2C are involved in macroautophagy and vesicular trafficking, respectively. Substrate proteins undergo unfolding after binding to LAMP-2A in a process likely mediated by the membrane associated hsc70 and its co-chaperones Bag1, hip, hop and hsp40, also detected at the lysosomal membrane. This binding of substrates to monomers of LAMP-2A triggers the assembly of LAMP-2A multimers that act as the active translocation complex through which the substrates can pass through after unfolding. Substrate translocation requires the presence of hsc70 inside the lysosomal lumen, which may act by either pulling substrates into the lysosomes or preventing their return to the cytosol. After translocation the substrate proteins are rapidly degraded by the lysosomal proteases. Figure 1 depicts the different steps of CMA.\n\nThe limiting step for CMA is the binding of the substrate proteins to LAMP-2A and, consequently, levels of LAMP-2A at the lysosomal membrane correlate directly with CMA activity. Therefore, to modulate the activity of this autophagic pathway, the cell stringently regulates the levels of the CMA receptor at the lysosomal membrane by controlling the degradation rates of LAMP-2A monomers in lysosomes and by de novo synthesis of LAMP-2A molecules. In addition, transport of substrates also depends on the efficiency of the assembly of LAMP-2A into the translocation complex.\n\nAssembly and disassembly of CMA translocation complex is mediated by hsp90 and hsc70 chaperones, respectively. Degradation of LAMP-2A monomers at the lysosomal membrane occurs in discrete cholesterol-rich lipid microdomains of the lysosomal membrane and it is mediated by Cathepsin A and an unidentified lysosomal metalloprotease. Therefore, assembly, disassembly of LAMP-2A into active translocation complex, and its degradation in microdomain regions, highlights the dynamic nature of this process and the importance of lateral mobility of the CMA receptor at the lysosomal membrane.\n\nCMA contributes to the maintenance of cellular homeostasis by facilitating recycling of amino acids of the degraded proteins (contribution to energetic cellular balance) and by eliminating abnormal or damaged proteins (contribution to cellular quality control).\n\nCMA is active at all times in different tissues (liver, kidney, brain), and almost all cell types in culture studied. However, it is maximally activated in response to stressors and changes in the cellular nutritional status. When nutrient supply is limited, the cells respond by activating autophagy, in order to degrade intracellular components to provide energy and building blocks, which the cell can utilize in this dire state. Macroautophagy is activated as early as 30 minutes into starvation and remains at high activity for at least 4–8 hours into starvation. If the starvation state persists for more than 10 hours, the cells switch to the selective form of autophagy, namely CMA, which is known to reach a plateau of maximal activation ~36 hours into fasting and remains at these levels until ~3 days. The selectivity of CMA for individual cytosolic proteins permits cells to degrade only those proteins that might not be required in these starvation conditions in order to generate amino acids for the synthesis of essential proteins. For example, some of the best-characterized CMA substrates are enzymes involved in glycolysis, a pathway known to be less active in fasting conditions.\n\nCMA is important in regulating cellular metabolism. Specific depletion of CMA in liver results in robust hepatic glycogen use accompanied with accumulation of fat in the liver, along with altered glucose homeostasis, increased energy expenditure and reduced peripheral adiposity. Proteomics analyses identified several enzymes of the carbohydrate and the lipid metabolism pathways to be CMA substrates, and their altered degradation in the knockout mice explaining the abnormal metabolic phenotype of the CMA-deficient mice.\n\nCMA activity has been shown to be modulated through retinoic acid receptor alpha signaling and is specifically activated by designed all-trans retinoic acid derivatives in cultured cells.\n\nCMA is also responsible for the selective removal of damaged and no-longer-functional proteins. This function is critical when cells are exposed to agents that cause protein damage as the selectivity of CMA ensures that only the damaged proteins get targeted to lysosomes for degradation. For instance, oxidative stress and exposure to toxic compounds are stimuli that upregulate CMA. Consequently, cells that are defective for CMA are more susceptible to these insults than control cells.\n\nCMA performs various specialized functions as well, depending on the specific protein undergoing degradation through this pathway and the cell type involved. For example, known CMA substrates include, MEF2D, a neuronal factor important for survival; Pax2, a transcription factor, important for the regulation growth of renal tubular cells; IκBα, known inhibitor of NFκB. CMA has also been suggested to contribute to antigen presentation in dendritic cells.\n\nCMA is activated during T cell activation due to increased expression of the CMA receptor LAMP-2A. CMA is essential for T cell activation through the degradation of negative regulators of T cell activation (Itch, RCAN1). Consequently, specific depletion of CMA in T cells results in immune response deficiency following immunization or infection.\n\nCMA is increased upon genotoxic stress. Conversely, decreased CMA activity associates with increased genome instability and decreased cell survival. CMA is involved in the removal of Chk1, a key protein for cell cycle progression and cells with impaired CMA have defective DNA repair.\n\nCMA degrades lipid droplet proteins (perilipin 2 and perilipin 3). Removal of these lipid droplet coat proteins by CMA precedes lipolysis and lipophagy. Consequently, defective CMA activity leads to massive accumulation of lipid droplets and steatosis.\n\nCMA activity declines with age in many cell types of old rodents and in cells of older humans. This impairment of CMA in aging is mainly due to a decrease in the levels of LAMP-2A at the lysosomal membrane, because of reduced stability of the CMA receptor and not due to decreased de novo synthesis. Studies in a transgenic mouse model in which normal levels of LAMP-2A are maintained throughout life, showed that these animals had ‘cleaner’ cells, better response to stress – and overall, a better health-span. These studies support the possible contribution of declined CMA activity to poor cellular homeostasis and inefficient response to stress characteristic of old organisms. High-fat diet inhibits CMA. This is because of a decrease in the stability of the CMA receptor at the lysosomal surface.\n\nA primary defect in CMA activity has also been described in neurodegenerative diseases, such as Parkinson’s disease and certain tauopathies. In these cases, the defect lies in the ‘tight’ binding to the lysosomal membrane of pathogenic proteins known to accumulate in these disorders (α-synuclein, UCHL1 in Parkinson’s disease and mutant Tau in tauopathies). These toxic proteins often bind to LAMP-2A with abnormal affinity exerting a ‘clogging effect’ at the lysosomal membrane and thus, inhibit the CMA-mediated degradation of other cytosolic substrate proteins.\n\nLinks between CMA and cancer have also been established. CMA is upregulated in many different types of human cancer cells and blockage of CMA in these cells reduces their proliferative, tumorigenic and metastatic capabilities. In fact, interference of the expression of LAMP-2A in already-formed experimental tumors in mice resulted in their regression.\n\n", "id": "37860179", "title": "Chaperone-mediated autophagy"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1300486", "text": "Vimentin\n\nVimentin is a protein that in humans is encoded by the \"VIM\" gene.\n\nVimentin is a type III intermediate filament (IF) protein that is expressed in mesenchymal cells. IF proteins are found in all metazoan cells as well as bacteria. IF, along with tubulin-based microtubules and actin-based microfilaments, comprises the cytoskeleton. All IF proteins are expressed in a highly developmentally-regulated fashion; vimentin is the major cytoskeletal component of mesenchymal cells. Because of this, vimentin is often used as a marker of mesenchymally-derived cells or cells undergoing an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) during both normal development and metastatic progression.\n\nA vimentin monomer, like all other intermediate filaments, has a central α-helical domain, capped on each end by non-helical amino (head) and carboxyl (tail) domains. Two monomers are likely co-translationally expressed in a way that facilitates their formation of a coiled-coil dimer, which is the basic subunit of vimentin assembly.\n\nThe α-helical sequences contain a pattern of hydrophobic amino acids that contribute to forming a \"hydrophobic seal\" on the surface of the helix. In addition, there is a periodic distribution of acidic and basic amino acids that seems to play an important role in stabilizing coiled-coil dimers. The spacing of the charged residues is optimal for ionic salt bridges, which allows for the stabilization of the α-helix structure. While this type of stabilization is intuitive for intrachain interactions, rather than interchain interactions, scientists have proposed that perhaps the switch from intrachain salt bridges formed by acidic and basic residues to the interchain ionic associations contributes to the assembly of the filament.\n\nVimentin plays a significant role in supporting and anchoring the position of the organelles in the cytosol. Vimentin is attached to the nucleus, endoplasmic reticulum, and mitochondria, either laterally or terminally.\n\nThe dynamic nature of vimentin is important when offering flexibility to the cell. Scientists found that vimentin provided cells with a resilience absent from the microtubule or actin filament networks, when under mechanical stress \"in vivo\". Therefore, in general, it is accepted that vimentin is the cytoskeletal component responsible for maintaining cell integrity. (It was found that cells without vimentin are extremely delicate when disturbed with a micropuncture). Transgenic mice that lack vimentin appeared normal and did not show functional differences. It is possible that the microtubule network may have compensated for the absence of the intermediate network. This result supports an intimate interactions between microtubules and vimentin. Moreover, when microtubule depolymerizers were present, vimentin reorganization occurred, once again implying a relationship between the two systems. On the other hand, wounded mice that lack the vimentin gene heal slower than their wild type counterparts.\n\nIn essence, vimentin is responsible for maintaining cell shape, integrity of the cytoplasm, and stabilizing cytoskeletal interactions. Vimentin has been shown to eliminate toxic proteins in JUNQ and IPOD inclusion bodies in asymmetric division of mammalian cell lines.\n\nAlso, vimentin is found to control the transport of low-density lipoprotein, LDL, -derived cholesterol from a lysosome to the site of esterification. With the blocking of transport of LDL-derived cholesterol inside the cell, cells were found to store a much lower percentage of the lipoprotein than normal cells with vimentin. This dependence seems to be the first process of a biochemical function in any cell that depends on a cellular intermediate filament network. This type of dependence has ramifications on the adrenal cells, which rely on cholesteryl esters derived from LDL.\n\nVimentin plays a role in aggresome formation, where it forms a cage surrounding a core of aggregated protein.\n\nIt has been used as a sarcoma tumor marker to identify mesenchyme.\n\nMethylation of the vimentin gene has been established as a biomarker of colon cancer and this is being utilized in the development of fecal tests for colon cancer. Statistically significant levels of vimentin gene methylation have also been observed in certain upper gastrointestinal pathologies such as Barrett's esophagus, esophageal adenocarcinoma, and intestinal type gastric cancer. High levels of DNA methylation in the promotor region have also been associated with markedly decreased survival in hormone positive breast cancers.\nDownregulation of vimentin was identified in cystic variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma using a proteomic approach. \nSee also Anti-citrullinated protein antibody for its use in diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis.\n\nVimentin has been shown to interact with: \n\n\nThe 3' UTR of Vimentin mRNA has been found to bind a 46kDa protein.\n\n", "id": "1300486", "title": "Vimentin"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14434367", "text": "Fluid compartments\n\nThe human body and even its individual body fluids may be conceptually divided into various fluid compartments, which, although not literally anatomic compartments, do represent a real division in terms of how portions of the body's water, solutes, and suspended elements are segregated. The two main fluid compartments are the intracellular and extracellular compartments. The intracellular compartment is the space within the organism's cells; it is separated from the extracellular compartment by cell membranes.\n\nAbout two thirds of the total body water of humans is held in the cells, mostly in the cytosol, and the remainder is found in the extracellular compartment. The extracellular fluids may be divided into three types: interstitial fluid in the \"interstitial compartment\" (surrounding tissue cells and bathing them in a solution of nutrients and other chemicals), blood plasma and lymph in the \"intravascular compartment\" (inside the blood vessels and lymphatic vessels), and small amounts of transcellular fluid such as ocular and cerebrospinal fluids in the \"transcellular compartment\". The interstitial and intravascular compartments readily exchange water and solutes but the third extracellular compartment, the transcellular, is thought of as separate from the other two and not in dynamic equilibrium with them.\n\nThe intracellular fluid is all fluid contained inside the cells. Most of this is cytosol, the matrix in which cellular organelles are suspended. The cytosol and organelles together compose the cytoplasm. The cell membranes are the outer barrier. In humans, the intracellular compartment contains on average about 28 litres of fluid, and under ordinary circumstances remains in osmotic equilibrium. It contains moderate quantities of magnesium and sulphate ions.\n\nThe interstitial, intravascular and transcellular compartments comprise the extracellular compartment. Its extracellular fluid (ECF) contains about one-third of total body water.\n\nThe interstitial compartment (also called \"tissue space\") surrounds tissue cells. It is filled with interstitial fluid. Interstitial fluid provides the immediate microenvironment that allows for movement of ions, proteins and nutrients across the cell barrier. This fluid is not static, but is continually being refreshed by the blood capillaries and recollected by lymphatic capillaries. In the average male (70 kg) human body, the interstitial space has approximately 10.5 litres of fluid.\n\nThe main intravascular fluid in mammals is blood, a complex mixture with elements of a suspension (blood cells), colloid (globulins), and solutes (glucose and ions). The blood represents both the intracellular compartment (the fluid inside the blood cells) and the extracellular compartment (the blood plasma). The other intravascular fluid is lymph. It too represents both the intracellular compartment (the fluid inside its lymphocytes) and the extracellular compartment (the noncellular matrix of the lymph, which is roughly equivalent to serum). The average volume of plasma in the average (70 kg) male is approximately 3.5 liters. The volume of the intravascular compartment is regulated in part by hydrostatic pressure gradients, and by reabsorption by the kidneys.\n\nThe third extracellular compartment, the transcellular, consists of those spaces in the body where fluid does not normally collect in larger amounts, or where any significant fluid collection is physiologically nonfunctional. Examples of transcellular spaces include the eye, the central nervous system, the peritoneal and pleural cavities, and the joint capsules. A small amount of fluid, called transcellular fluid, does exist normally in such spaces. For example, the aqueous humor, the vitreous humor, the cerebrospinal fluid, the serous fluid produced by the serous membranes, and the synovial fluid produced by the synovial membranes are all transcellular fluids. They are all very important, yet there is not much of each. For example, there is only about 150 mL of cerebrospinal fluid in the entire central nervous system at any moment. All of the aforementioned fluids are produced by active cellular processes working with blood plasma as the raw material, and they are all more or less similar to blood plasma except for certain modifications tailored to their function. For example, the cerebrospinal fluid is made by various cells of the CNS, mostly the ependymal cells, from blood plasma.\n\n\"Fluid shifts\" occur when the body's fluids move between the fluid compartments. Physiologically, this occurs by a combination of hydrostatic pressure gradients and osmotic pressure gradients. Water will move from one space into the next passively across a semi permeable membrane until the hydrostatic and osmotic pressure gradients balance each other. Many medical conditions can cause fluid shifts. When fluid moves out of the intravascular compartment (the blood vessels), blood pressure can drop to dangerously low levels, endangering critical organs such as the brain, heart and kidneys; when it shifts out of the cells (the intracellular compartment), cellular processes slow down or cease from intracellular dehydration; when excessive fluid accumulates in the interstitial space, oedema develops; and fluid shifts into the brain cells can cause increased cranial pressure. Fluid shifts may be compensated by fluid replacement or diuretics.\n\n\"Third spacing\" is the abnormal accumulation of fluid into an extracellular and extravascular space. In medicine, the term is often used with regard to loss of fluid into interstitial spaces, such as with burns or edema, but it can also refer to fluid shifts into a body cavity (transcellular space), such as ascites and pleural effusions. With regard to severe burns, fluids may pool on the burn site (i.e. fluid lying outside of the interstitial tissue, exposed to evaporation) and cause depletion of the fluids. With pancreatitis or ileus, fluids may \"leak out\" into the peritoneal cavity, also causing depletion of the intracellular, interstitial or vascular compartments.\n\nPatients who undergo long, difficult operations in large surgical fields can collect third-space fluids and become intravascularly depleted despite large volumes of intravenous fluid and blood replacement.\n\nThe precise volume of fluid in a patient's third spaces changes over time and is difficult to accurately quantify.\n\nThird spacing conditions may include peritonitis, pyometritis, and pleural effusions. Hydrocephalus and glaucoma are theoretically forms of third spacing, but the volumes are too small to induce significant shifts in blood volumes, or overall body volumes, and thus are generally not referred to as third spacing.\n\n", "id": "14434367", "title": "Fluid compartments"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38095130", "text": "Deutoplasm\n\nDeutoplasm refers to the food particles stored in the cytoplasm of an ovum or a cell, as distinguished from protoplasm, the yolk substance. Generally, the deutoplasm accumulates about the nucleus and is heavier than the surrounding cytoplasm. In chicken eggs, the cytoplasm and deutoplasm are separate.\n", "id": "38095130", "title": "Deutoplasm"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9188741", "text": "Ena/Vasp homology proteins\n\nENA/VASP Homology proteins or EVH proteins are a family of closely related proteins involved in cell motility in vertebrate and invertebrate animals. EVH proteins are modular proteins that are involved in actin polymerization, as well as interaction with other proteins. Within the cell, Ena/VASP proteins are found at the leading edge of Lamellipodia and at the tips of filopodia. Ena, the founding member of the family was discovered in a drosophila genetic screen for mutations that act as dominant suppressors of the abl non receptor tyrosine kinase. Invertebrate animals have one Ena homologue, whereas mammals have three, in mice named Mena, VASP, and Evl.\n\nEna/VASP proteins promote the spatially regulated actin polymerization required for efficient chemotaxis in response to attractive and repulsive guidance cues. Mice lacking functional copies of all three family members display pleiotropic phenotypes including exencephaly, edema, failures in neurite formation, and embryonic lethality.\n\nA sub-domain of EVH is the EVH1 domain.\n\nVasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein (VASP) 45-residue-long tetramerization protein domain which regulates actin dynamics in the cytoskeleton. This is vital for processes such as cell adhesion and cell migration.\n\nVasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein (VASP) is an actin cytoskeletal regulatory protein. VASP is often found in dynamic actin structures like filopodia and lamellipodia, but its precise function in their formation is controversial. VASP accelerates filament elongation by delivering monomeric actin to the growing barbed (+) end.\n\nThe structure is a right-handed alpha helical coiled-coil structure.\n", "id": "9188741", "title": "Ena/Vasp homology proteins"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38149258", "text": "Septate junctions\n\nSeptate junctions are intercellular junctions found in invertebrate epithelial cells, and appear ladder-like under electron microscopy. They are thought to provide structural strength and a barrier to solute diffusion through the intercellular space. They are considered somewhat analogous to the (vertebrate) tight junctions, however tight and septate junctions are different in many ways. Known insect homologues of tight junction components are components of conserved signalling pathways that localise to either adherens junctions or the subapical complex or marginal zone.\n", "id": "38149258", "title": "Septate junctions"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38705478", "text": "Chaperone-assisted selective autophagy\n\nChaperone-assisted selective autophagy (CASA) is a cellular process for the selective, ubiquitin-dependent degradation of chaperone-bound proteins in lysosomes.\n\nAutophagy (Greek: ‘self-eating’) was initially identified as a catabolic process for the unselective degradation of cellular content in lysosomes under starvation conditions. However, autophagy also comprises selective degradation pathways, which depend on ubiquitin conjugation to initiate sorting to lysosomes. In the case of CASA, dysfunctional, nonnative proteins are recognized by molecular chaperones and become ubiquitinated by chaperone-associated ubiquitin ligases. The ubiquitinated proteins are enclosed in autophagosomes, which eventually fuse with lysosomes, leading to the degradation of the dysfunctional proteins. CASA is a vital part of the cellular protein quality control system. It is essential for protein homeostais (proteostasis) in neurons and in mechanically strained cells and tissues such as skeletal muscle, heart and lung.\n\nThe CASA complex comprises the molecular chaperones HSPA8 and HSPB8, and the cochaperones BAG3 and STUB1. BAG3 facilitates the cooperation of HSPA8 and HSPB8 during the recognition of nonnative client proteins. STUB1 mediates the ubiquitination of the chaperone-bound client, which induces the recruitment of the autophagic ubiquitin adaptor SQSTM1. The adaptor simultaneously interacts with the ubiquitinated client and autophagosome membrane precursors, thereby inducing the autophagic engulfment of the client. Autophagosome formation during CASA depends on an interaction of BAG3 with SYNPO2, which triggers the cooperation with a VPS18-containing protein complex that mediates the fusion of autophagosome membrane precursors. The formed autophagosomes finally fuse with lysosomes, resulting in client degradation.\n\nProteins that are degraded by chaperone-assisted selective autophagy include pathogenic forms of the Huntingtin protein, which cause Huntington's disease. Furthermore, the expression of the CASA-inducing cochaperone BAG3 is upregulated in aged neuronal cells, which correlates with an increased necessity to dispose oxidatively damaged proteins through autophagy. CASA is thus essential for proteostasis in neurons.\n\nIn mechanically strained cells and tissues, CASA mediates the degradation of the actin-crosslinking protein filamin. Mechanical tension results in unfolding of filamin, leading to recognition by the CASA chaperone complex and to the autophagic degradation of damaged filamin. This is a prerequisite for the maintenance of the actin cytoskeleton in mechanically strained cells and tissues. Impairment of CASA in patients and animal models causes muscle dystrophy and cardiomyopathy.\n", "id": "38705478", "title": "Chaperone-assisted selective autophagy"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5221389", "text": "Cell damage\n\nCell damage can occur as a result of an adverse stimulus which disrupts the normal homeostasis of affected cells. Among other causes, this can be due to physical, chemical, infectious, biological, nutritional or immunological factors. Cell damage can be reversible or irreversible. Depending on the extent of injury, the cellular response may be adaptive and where possible, homeostasis is restored. Cell death occurs when the severity of the injury exceeds the cell’s ability to repair itself. Cell death is relative to both the length of exposure to a harmful stimulus and the severity of the damage caused. Cell death may occur by necrosis or apoptosis.\n\n\nThe most notable components of the cell that are targets of cell damage are the DNA and the cell membrane.\n\n\nSome cell damage can be reversed once the stress is removed or if compensatory cellular changes occur. Full function may return to cells but in some cases a degree of injury will remain.\n\nCellular swelling (or cloudy swelling) may occur due to cellular hypoxia, which damages the sodium-potassium membrane pump; it is reversible when the cause is eliminated.\nCellular swelling is the first manifestation of almost all forms of injury to cells. When it affects many cells in an organ, it causes some pallor, increased turgor, and increase in weight of the organ. On microscopic examination, small clear vacuoles may be seen within the cytoplasm; these represent distended and pinched-off segments of the endoplasmic reticulum. This pattern of non-lethal injury is sometimes called hydropic change or vacuolar degeneration. Hydropic degeneration is a severe form of cloudy swelling. It occurs with hypokalemia due to vomiting or diarrhea.\n\nThe ultrastructural changes of reversible cell injury include:\n\n\nThe cell has been damaged and is unable to adequately metabolize fat. Small vacuoles of fat accumulate and become dispersed within cytoplasm. Mild fatty change may have no effect on cell function; however more severe fatty change can impair cellular function. In the liver, the enlargement of hepatocytes due to fatty change may compress adjacent bile canaliculi, leading to cholestasis. Depending on the cause and severity of the lipid accumulation, fatty change is generally reversible. Fatty Change is also known as fatty degeneration, fatty metamorphosis, or fatty steatosis.\n\nNecrosis is characterised by cytoplasmic swelling, irreversible damage to the plasma membrane, and organelle breakdown leading to cell death. The stages of cellular necrosis include \"pyknosis\"; clumping of chromosomes and shrinking of the nucleus of the cell\", karyorrhexis\"; fragmentation of the nucleus and break up of the chromatin into unstructured granules, and \"karyolysis\"; dissolution of the cell nucleus. Cytosolic components that leak through the damaged plasma membrane into the extracellular space can incur an inflammatory response.\n\nThere are six types of necrosis:\n\n\nApoptosis is the programmed cell death of superfluous or potentially harmful cells in the body. It is an energy dependent process mediated by proteolytic enzymes called caspases, which trigger cell death through the cleaving of specific proteins in the cytoplasm and nucleus. The dying cells shrink and condense into apoptotic bodies. The cell surface is altered so as to display properties which lead to rapid phagocytosis by macrophages or neighbouring cells. Unlike necrotic cell death, neighbouring cells are not damaged by apoptosis as cytosolic products are safely isolated by membranes prior to undergoing phagocytosis. In the average adult between 50 and 70 billion cells die each day due to apoptosis. Inhibition of apoptosis can result in a number of cancers, autoimmune diseases, inflammatory diseases, and viral infections. Hyperactive apoptosis can lead to neurodegenerative diseases, hematologic diseases, and tissue damage.\n\nWhen a cell is damaged the body will try to repair or replace the cell to continue normal functions. If a cell dies the body will remove it and replace it with another functioning cell, or fill the gap with connective tissue to provide structural support for the remaining cells. The motto of the repair process is to fill a gap caused by the damaged cells to regain structural continuity. Normal cells try to regenerate the damaged cells but this cannot always happen. Asexual reproduction is what repairs cells\n\nRegeneration of parenchyma cells, or the functional cells, of an organism. The body can make more cells to replace the damaged cells keeping the organ or tissue intact and fully functional.\n\nWhen a cell cannot be regenerated the body will replace it with stromal connective tissue to maintain tissue/organ function. Stromal cells are the cells that support the parenchymal cells in any organ. Fibroblasts, immune cells, pericytes, and inflammatory cells are the most common types of stromal cells.\n\nATP (adenosine triphosphate) depletion is a common biological alteration that occurs with cellular injury. This change can happen despite the inciting agent of the cell damage. A reduction in intracellular ATP can have a number of functional and morphologic consequences during cell injury. \nThese effects include:\n\n\nDNA damage (or RNA damage in the case of some virus genomes) appears to be a fundamental problem for life. As noted by Haynes, the subunits of DNA are not endowed with any peculiar kind of quantum mechanical stability, and thus DNA is vulnerable to all the \"chemical horrors\" that might befall any such molecule in a warm aqueous medium. These chemical horrors are DNA damages that include various types of modification of the DNA bases, single- and double-strand breaks, and inter-strand cross-links (see DNA damage (naturally occurring). DNA damages are distinct from mutations although both are errors in the DNA. Whereas DNA damages are abnormal chemical and structural alterations, mutations ordinarily involve the normal four bases in new arrangements. Mutations can be replicated, and thus inherited when the DNA replicates. In contrast, DNA damages are altered structures that cannot, themselves, be replicated.\n\nSeveral different repair processes can remove DNA damages (see chart in DNA repair). However, those DNA damages that remain un-repaired can have detrimental consequences. DNA damages may block replication or gene transcription. These blockages can lead to cell death. In multicellular organisms, cell death in response to DNA damage may occur by a programmed process, apoptosis. Alternatively, when a DNA polymerase replicates a template strand containing a damaged site, it may inaccurately bypass the damage and, as a consequence, introduce an incorrect base leading to a mutation. Experimentally, mutation rates increase substantially in cells defective in DNA mismatch repair or in Homologous recombinational repair (HRR).\n\nIn both prokaryotes and eukaryotes, DNA genomes are vulnerable to attack by reactive chemicals naturally produced in the intracellular environment and by agents from external sources. An important internal source of DNA damage in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes is reactive oxygen species (ROS) formed as byproducts of normal aerobic metabolism. For eukaryotes, oxidative reactions are a major source of DNA damage (see DNA damage (naturally occurring) and Sedelnikova et al.). In humans, about 10,000 oxidative DNA damages occur per cell per day. In the rat, which has a higher metabolic rate than humans, about 100,000 oxidative DNA damages occur per cell per day. In aerobically growing bacteria, ROS appear to be a major source of DNA damage, as indicated by the observation that 89% of spontaneously occurring base substitution mutations are caused by introduction of ROS-induced single-strand damages followed by error-prone replication past these damages. Oxidative DNA damages usually involve only one of the DNA strands at any damaged site, but about 1–2% of damages involve both strands. The double-strand damages include double-strand breaks (DSBs) and inter-strand crosslinks. For humans, the estimated average number of endogenous DNA DSBs per cell occurring at each cell generation is about 50. This level of formation of DSBs likely reflects the natural level of damages caused, in large part, by ROS produced by active metabolism.\n\nFive major pathways are employed in repairing different types of DNA damages. These five pathways are nucleotide excision repair, base excision repair, mismatch repair, non-homologous end joining and homologous recombinational repair (HRR) (see chart in DNA repair) and reference. Only HRR can accurately repair double strand damages, such as DSBs. The HRR pathway requires that a second homologous chromosome be available to allow recovery of the information lost by the first chromosome due to the double-strand damage.\n\nDNA damage appears to play a key role in mammalian aging, and an adequate level of DNA repair promotes longevity (see DNA damage theory of aging and reference.). In addition, an increased incidence of DNA damage and/or reduced DNA repair cause an increased risk of cancer (see Cancer, Carcinogenesis and Neoplasm) and reference). Furthermore, the ability of HRR to accurately and efficiently repair double-strand DNA damages likely played a key role in the evolution of sexual reproduction (see Evolution of sexual reproduction and reference. In extant eukaryotes, HRR during meiosis provides the major benefit of maintaining fertility.\n\n", "id": "5221389", "title": "Cell damage"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38991948", "text": "Single-cell analysis\n\nIn the field of cellular biology, single-cell analysis is the study of genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics and metabolomics at the single cell level. Due to the heterogeneity seen in both eukaryotic and prokaryotic cell populations, analyzing a single cell makes it possible to discover mechanisms not seen when studying a bulk population of cells. Technologies such as fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) have increased the throughput of single cell sorting, and increased the development of single cell analysis techniques. The development of new technologies are increasing our ability to sequence the genome, and transcriptome, of single cells, as well as to quantify their proteome and metabolome.\n\nThe first step of single-cell analysis is the isolation of single cells. There are seven methods currently used for single cell isolation: serial dilution, micromanipulation, laser capture microdissection, FACS, microfluidics, manual picking, and Raman tweezers.\n\nManual single cell picking is a method is where cells in a suspension are viewed under a microscope, and individually picked using a micropipette. Raman tweezers is a technique where  Raman spectroscopy is combined with optical tweezers, which uses a laser beam to trap, and manipulate cells.\n\nThe development of hydrodynamic-based microfluidic biochips has been increasing over the years. In this technique, the cells or particles are trapped in a particular region for single cell analysis (SCA) usually without any application of external force fields such as optical, electrical, magnetic or acoustic. There is a need to explore the insights of SCA in the cell's natural state and development of these techniques is highly essential for that study. Researchers have highlighted the vast potential field that needs to be explored to develop biochip devices to suit market/researcher demands. Hydrodynamic microfluidics facilitates the development of passive lab-on-chip applications. A latest review gives an account of the recent advances in this field, along with their mechanisms, methods and applications.\n\nSingle-cell genomics is heavily dependent on increasing the copies of DNA found in the cell so there is enough to be sequenced. This has led to the development of strategies for \"whole genome amplification\" (WGA). One widely adopted WGA techniques is called degenerate oligonucleotide–primed polymerase chain reaction (DOP-PCR). This method uses the well established DNA amplification method PCR to try and amplify the entire genome using a large set of primers. Although simple, this method has been shown to have very low genome coverage. An improvement on DOP-PCR is Multiple displacement amplification (MDA), which uses random primers and a high fidelity enzyme, usually Φ29 DNA polymerase, to accomplish the amplification of larger fragments and greater genome coverage than DOP-PCR. Despite these improvement MDA still has a sequence dependent bias (certain parts of the genome are amplified more than others because of their sequence). The method shown to largely avoid the bias seen in DOP-PCR and MDA is Multiple Annealing and Looping–Based Amplification Cycles (MALBAC). Bias in this system is reduced by only copying off the original DNA strand instead of making copies of copies. The main draw backs to using MALBA, is it has reduced accuracy compared to DOP-PCR and MDA due to the enzyme used to copy the DNA. Once amplified using any of the above techniques, the DNA is sequenced using next-generation sequencing (NGS).\n\nThere are two major applications to studying the genome at the single cell level. One application is to track the changes that occur in bacterial populations, where phenotypic differences are often seen. These differences are missed by bulk sequencing of a population, but can be observed in single cell sequencing. The second major application is to study the genetic evolution of cancer. Since cancer cells are constantly mutating it is of great interest to see how cancers evolve at the genetic level. These patterns of mutation can be observed using single cell sequencing.\n\nSingle-cell transcriptomics uses very similar techniques as single cell genomics. The first step in quantifying the transcriptome is to convert RNA do cDNA using reverse transcriptase so that the contents of the cell can be sequenced using NGS methods as was done in genomics. Once converted, there is not enough cDNA to be sequenced so the same DNA amplification techniques discussed in single cell genomics are applied to the cDNA to make sequencing possible.\n\nThe purpose of single cell transcriptomics is to determine what genes are being expressed in each cell. The transcriptome is often used to quantify the gene expression instead of the proteome because of the difficulty currently associated with amplifying protein levels.\n\nThere are three major reasons gene expression has been studied using this technique: to study gene dynamics, RNA splicing, and cell typing. Gene dynamics are usually studied to determine what changes in gene expression effect different cell characteristics. For example, this type of transcriptomic analysis has often been used to study embryonic development. RNA splicing studies are focused on understanding the regulation of different transcript isoforms. Single cell transcriptomics has also been used for cell typing, where the genes expressed in a cell are used to identify types of cells. The main goal in cell typing is to find a way to determine the identity of cells that don't have known genetic markers.\n\nThere are two major approaches to single-cell proteomics: antibody based methods, and mass spectroscopy based methods.\n\nThe antibody based methods use designed antibodies to bind to proteins of interest. These antibodies can be bound to fluorescent molecules such as quantum dots of different colors. Since different colored quantum dots are attached to different antibodies it is possible to identify multiple different proteins in a single cell. This method also allows the quantum dots to be washed off of the antibodies without damaging the sample, making it possible to do multiple rounds of protein quantification using this method on the same sample.\n\nAnother antibody based method converts protein levels to DNA levels. The conversion to DNA makes it possible to amplify protein levels and use NGS to quantify proteins. To do this, two antibodies are designed for each protein needed to be quantified. The two antibodies are then modified to have single stranded DNA connected to them that are complimentary. When the two antibodies bind to a protein the complimentary strands will anneal and produce a double stranded piece of DNA that can then be amplified using PCR. Each pair of antibodies designed for one protein is tagged with a different DNA sequence. The DNA amplified from PCR can then be sequenced, and the protein levels quantified.\n\nIn mass spectroscopy based proteomics there are three major steps needed for peptide identification: sample preparation, separation of peptides, and identification of peptides. Several groups have focused on oocytes or very early cleavage-stage cells since these cells are unusually large and provide enough material for analysis. Another approach, single cell proteomics by mass spectrometry (SCoPE-MS) has quantified thousands of proteins in mammalian cells with typical cell sizes (diameter of 10-15 μm) by combining carrier-cells and labeling. Multiple methods exist to isolate the peptides for analysis. These include using filter aided sample preparation, the use of magnetic beads, or using a series of reagents and centrifuging steps.  The separation of differently sized proteins can be accomplished by using capillary electrophoresis (CE) or liquid chromatograph (LC) (using liquid chromatography with mass spectroscopy is also known as LC-MS). This step gives order to the peptides before quantification using tandem mass-spectroscopy (MS/MS). The major difference between quantification methods is some use labels on the peptides such as tandem mass tags (TMT) or dimethyl labels which are used to identify which cell a certain protein came from (proteins coming from each cell have a different label) while others use not labels (quantify cells individually). The mass spectroscopy data is then analyzed by running data through databases that convert the information about peptides identified to quantification of protein levels. These methods are very similar to those used to quantify the proteome of bulk cells, with modifications to accommodate the very small sample volume.\n\nThe purpose of studying the proteome is to better understand the activity of cells at the single cells level. Since proteins are responsible for determining how the cell acts, understanding the proteome of single cell gives the best understanding of how a cell operates, and how gene expression changes in a cell due to different environmental stimuli. Although transcriptomics has the same purpose as proteomics it is not as accurate at determining gene expression in cells as it does not take into account post-transcriptional regulation. Transcriptomics is still important as studying the difference between RNA levels and protein levels could give insight on which genes are post-transcriptionally regulated.\n\nThere are four major methods used to quantify the metabolome of single cells, they are: fluorescence–based detection, fluorescence biosensors, FRET biosensors, and mass spectroscopy. The first three methods listed use fluorescence microscopy to detect molecules in a cell. Usually these assays use small fluorescent tags attached to molecules of interest, however this has been shown be too invasive for single cell metabolomics, and alters the activity of the metabolites. The current solution to this problem is to use fluorescent proteins which will act as metabolite detectors, fluorescing when ever they bind to a metabolite of interest.\n\nMass spectroscopy is becoming the most frequently used method for single cell metabolomics. Its advantages are that there is no need to develop fluorescent proteins for all molecules of interest, and is capable of detecting metabolites in the femtomole range. Similar to the methods discussed in proteomics, there has also been success in combining mass spectroscopy with separation techniques such as capillary electrophoresis to quantify metabolites. This method is also capable of detecting metabolites present in femtomole concentrations.\n\nThe purpose of single cell metabolomics is to gain a better understanding at the molecular level of major biological topics such as: cancer, stem cells, aging, as well as the development of drug resistance. In general the focus of metabolomics is mostly on understanding how cells deal with environmental stresses at the molecular level, and to give a more dynamic understanding of cellular functions.\n\n", "id": "38991948", "title": "Single-cell analysis"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10585", "text": "Flagellate\n\nA flagellate is a cell or organism with one or more whip-like appendages called flagella. The word \"flagellate\" also describes a particular construction (or level of organization) characteristic of many prokaryotes and eukaryotes and their means of motion. The term presently does not imply any specific relationship or classification of the organisms that possess flagellae. However, the term \"flagellate\" is included in other terms (such as \"dinoflagellate\" and \"choanoflagellata\") which are more formally characterized.\n\nEukaryotic flagella are supported by microtubules in a characteristic arrangement, with nine fused pairs surrounding two central singlets. These arise from a basal body. In some flagellates, flagella direct food into a cytostome or mouth, where food is ingested. Flagella often support hairs, called mastigonemes, or contain rods. Their ultrastructure plays an important role in classifying eukaryotes. \n\nAmong protoctists and microscopic animals, a flagellate is an organism with one or more whip-like organelles called flagella. Some cells in animals may be flagellate, for instance the spermatozoa of most phyla. Flowering plants do not produce flagellate cells, but ferns, mosses, green algae, and some gymnosperms and closely related plants do so. Likewise, most fungi do not produce cells with flagellae, but the primitive fungal chytrids do. Many protists take the form of single-celled flagellates.\n\nFlagella are generally used for propulsion. They may also be used to create a current that brings in food. In most such organisms, one or more flagella are located at or near the anterior of the cell, e.g., \"Euglena\". Often there is one directed forwards and one trailing behind. Among animals, fungi, and Choanozoa, which make up a group called the opisthokonts, there is a single posterior flagellum. They are from the phylum Mastigophora. They can cause diseases and are typically heterotrophic. They reproduce by binary fission.They spend most of their existence moving or feeding. Many parasites that affect human health or economy are flagellates. Flagellates are the major consumers of primary and secondary production in aquatic ecosystems - consuming bacteria and other protists.\n\nAn overview of the occurrence of flagellated cells in eukaryote groups, as specialized cells of multicellular organisms or as life cycle stages, is given below (see also the article flagellum):\n\n\nIn older classifications, flagellated protozoa were grouped in Flagellata (= Mastigophora), sometimes divided in Phytoflagellata (= Phytomastigina, mostly autotrophic) and Zooflagellata (= Zoomastigina, heterotrophic). They were sometimes grouped with Sarcodina (ameboids) in the group Sarcomastigophora.\n\nThe autotrophic flagellates were grouped similarly to the botanical schemes used for the corresponding algae groups. The colourless flagellates were customary grouped in three groups, highly artificial:\n\nPresently, these groups are known to be highly polyphyletic. In modern classifications of the protists, the principal flagellated taxa are placed in the following eukaryote groups, which include also non-flagellated forms (A: autotrophic; F: free-living heterotrophic; P: parasitic; S: symbiotic):\n\n\nAlthough the taxonomic group Flagellata was abandoned, the term \"flagellate\" is still used as the description of a and also as an ecological functional group. Another term used is \"monadoid\", from monad. as in \"Monas\", and \"Cryptomonas\" and in the groups as listed above.\n\nThe amoeboflagellates (e.g., the rhizarian genus \"Cercomonas\", some amoebozoan Archamoebae, some excavate Heterolobosea) have a peculiar type of flagellate/amoeboid organization, in which cells may present flagella and pseudopods, simultaneously or sequentially, while the helioflagellates (e.g., the cercozoan heliomonads/dimorphids, the stramenopile pedinellids and ciliophryids) have a flagellate/heliozoan organization.\n\n", "id": "10585", "title": "Flagellate"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12240016", "text": "Cell fusion\n\nCell fusion is an important cellular process in which several uninuclear cells (cells with a single nucleus) combine to form a multinuclear cell, known as a syncytium. Cell fusion occurs during differentiation of muscle, bone and trophoblast cells, during embryogenesis, and during morphogenesis. Cell fusion is a necessary event in the maturation of cells so that they maintain their specific functions throughout growth.\n\nIn 1847 Theodore Schwann expanded upon the theory that all living organisms are composed of cells when he added to it that discrete cells are the basis of life. Schwann observed that in certain cells the walls and cavities of the cells coalesce together. It was this observation that provided the first hint that cells fuse.\nIt was not until 1960 that cell biologists deliberately fused cells for the first time. To fuse the cells, biologists combined isolated mouse cells, with the same kind of tissue, and induced fusion of their outer membrane using the Sendai virus (a respiratory virus in mice). Each of the fused hybrid cells contained a single nucleus with chromosomes from both fusion partners. Synkaryon became the name of this type of cell combined with a nucleus.\nIn the late 1960s biologists successfully fused cells of different types and from different species. The hybrid products of these fusions, heterokaryon, were hybrids that maintained two or more separate nuclei. This work was headed by Henry Harris at the University of Oxford and Nils Ringertz from Sweden's Karolinska Institute. These two men are responsible for reviving the interest of cell fusion. The hybrid cells interested biologists in the area of how different kinds of cytoplasm affect different kinds of nuclei. The work conducted by Henry and Nils showed that proteins from one gene fusion affect gene expression in the other partner's nucleus, and vice versa. These hybrid cells that were created were considered forced exceptions to normal cellular integrity and it was not until 2002 that the possibility of cell fusion between cells of different types may have a real function in mammals.\n\nThere are two different types of cell fusion that can occur. These two types include homotypic and heterotypic cell fusion.\n\nHomotypic cell fusion occurs between cells of the same type. An example of this would be osteoclasts or myofibers being fusing together with their respective type of cells. Whenever the two nuclei merge a synkaryon is produced. Cell fusion normally occurs with nuclear fusion, but in the absence of nuclear fusion, the cell would be described as a binucleated heterokaryon. A heterokaryon is the melding of two or more cells into one and it may reproduce itself for several generations. If two of the same type of cells fuse, but their nuclei do not fuse, then the resulting cell is called a syncytium.\n\nHeterotypic cell fusion occurs between cells of different types, making it the exact opposite of homotypic cell fusion. The result of this fusion is also a synkaryon produced by the merging of the nuclei, and a binucleated heterokaryon in the absence of nuclear fusion. An example of this would be BMDCs being fused with parenchymatous organs.\n\nThere are three methods that cell biologists use to fuse cells. These three ways include electrical cell fusion, polyethylene glycol cell fusion, and sendai virus induced cell fusion. \n\nElectrical cell fusion, is an essential step in some of the most innovative methods in modern biology. This method begins when two cells are brought into contact by dielectrophoresis. Dielectrophoresis uses a high frequency alternating current, unlike electrophoresis in which a direct current is applied. Once the cells are brought together, a pulsed voltage is applied. The pulse voltage causes the cell membrane to permeate and subsequent combining of the membranes and the cells then fuse. After this, alternative voltage is applied for a brief period of time to stabilize the process. The result of this is that the cytoplasm has mixed together and the cell membrane has completely fused. All that remains separate is the nuclei, which will fuse at a later time within the cell, making the result a heterokaryon cell.\n\nPolyethylene glycol cell fusion is the simplest, but most toxic, way to fuse cells. In this type of cell fusion polyethylene glycol, PEG, acts as a dehydrating agent and fuses not only plasma membranes but also intracellular membranes. This leads to cell fusion since PEG induces cell agglutination and cell-to-cell contact. Though this type of cell fusion is the most widely used, it still has downfalls. Oftentimes PEG can cause uncontrollable fusion of multiple cells, leading to the appearance of giant polykaryons. Also, standard PEG cell fusion is poorly reproducible and different types of cells have various fusion susceptibilities. This type of cell fusion is widely used for the production of somatic cell hybrids and for nuclear transfer in mammalian cloning.\n\nSendai virus induced cell fusion occurs in four different temperature stages. During the first stage, which lasts no longer than 10 minutes, viral adsorption takes place and the adsorbed virus can be inhibited by viral antibodies. The second stage, which is 20 minutes, is pH dependent and an addition of viral antiserum can still inhibit ultimate fusion. In the third, antibody-refractory stage, viral envelope constituents remain detectable on the surface of cells. During the fourth stage, cell fusion becomes evident and HA neuraminidase and fusion factor begin to disappear. The first and second stages are the only two that are pH dependent.\n\nAlternative forms of restoring organ function and replacing damaged cells are needed with donor organs and tissue for transplantation being so scarce. It is because of the scarcity that biologists have begun considering the potential for therapeutic cell fusion. Biologists have been discussing implications of the observation that cell fusion can occur with restorative effects following tissue damage or cell transplantation. Though using cell fusion for this is being talked about and worked on, there are still many challenges those who wish to implement cell fusion as a therapeutic tool face. These challenges include choosing the best cells to use for the reparative fusion, determining the best way to introduce the chosen cells into the desired tissue, discovering methods to increase the incidence in cell fusion, and ensuring that the resulting fusion products will function properly. If these challenges can be overcome then cell fusion may have therapeutic potential.\n\n\n\n", "id": "12240016", "title": "Cell fusion"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39326219", "text": "Liver cytology\n\nLiver cytology is the branch of cytology that studies the liver cells and its functions. The liver is a vital organ, in charge of almost all the body’s metabolism. Main liver cells are hepatocytes, Kupffer cells, and hepatic stellate cells; each one with a specific function.\n\nCytology is the name given to the branch of biology that deals with the formation, structure and functionality of the cells. Liver cytology specializes in the study of liver cells. The main liver cells are called hepatocytes; however, there are other cells that can be observed in a liver sample such as Kupffer cells (macrophages). The liver is the biggest gland of the body. It has a wide variety of functions that range from the destruction of old blood cells to the control of the whole metabolism of macromolecules. In the fetus, the liver works as a principal center for hematopoiesis, function that is later replaced by the bone marrow. This hematopoietic function is not normally seen after birth; however, in certain pathological conditions this function may still be seen. It is important to note that the liver is an essential organ and it is the only one in the body that has the ability to regenerate itself after surgery or damage.\n\nSince cytology deals with tissues, which are composed of cells, samples of tissues must be obtained in order to analyze the cells. There are several ways of obtaining a sample, the first is through dissecting a corpse, with a sample of tissue taken during an autopsy. The second is performing an aspirate (bone marrow, cerebrospinal fluid, etc.). To perform an aspirate in liquid tissues, a needle is inserted inside the body and a sample is extracted. Another common method is surgery, with a piece being removed during the procedure for later analysis. Finally, another common method is biopsy. In a biopsy, a needle is inserted into the skin and a solid sample of tissue is obtained.\n\nAfter the sample is obtained, it has to be processed by different methods depending on the nature of the sample. Liquid samples, such as blood, are extracted and dried out, while solid samples must be dehydrated using a different combination of alcoholic compounds. The tissue must also be stained, usually with haematoxylin and eosin, a pair of colorants that identify the acidic-basic nature of the cells. After this treatment the samples are analyzed under a microscope, which can be optical or electronic, to determine if the sample is normal or pathological.\n\nThe hepatocytes are the parenchymal cells of the liver, which form the lobules. They are intimately associated with the sinusoids, which are a network of capillaries. Since they are metabolically active cells, their cytoplasm has many organelles.\n\nHepatocytes are the main cells of the liver. They are large polyhedral cells, with six surfaces, three of which have a relevant function. The threes relevant type of surfaces are sinusoidal, canalicular and intercellular. These surfaces are involved in the exchange of substances between the hepatocyte, the vessels and the biliar canaliculi. The sinusoidal surfaces are separated from the sinusoids because of the perisinusoidal space. They represent 70% of the total hepatocyte surface. They are coated by microvilli which emerge to the perisinusoidal space. These surfaces are the place where the exchange of substances between the hepatocytes and the sinusoids occurs. The canalicular surfaces are the ones through which bile drains from the hepatocytes to the canaliculi. They represent 15% of the surface of the cell. The cytoplasm of the hepatocyte near canaliculi is rich in actin filaments, and they are probably capable of modifying the canaliculi’s diameter, thus influencing the flow; however this is not yet proven. The intercellular surfaces are the ones that are between two adjacent hepatocytes and they are not in contact with sinusoids or canaliculi. These are simple surfaces specialized in the cellular adherence and in the communication between hepatocytes through gap junctions.\n\nHepatocytes measure between 20 and 30 µm in each dimension. They are in charge of developing all the functions of the liver such as the metabolism of lipids, carbohydrates and proteins, as well as the processing of hormones and drugs. Hepatocytes constitute about 80% of the cell population of the liver, with the other 20% being occupied by Kupffer cells, hepatic stellate cells, endothelial cells and mesothelial cells, which are not exactly characteristic of the liver, but are present in the liver samples.\n\nHistologically speaking, hepatocytes have specific characteristics. Their nuclei are large and spheroidal, occupying the center of the cell. There is at least one nucleolus in each nucleus. In the adult liver, most of the cells are binucleated, and most of the hepatocytes are tetraploid, which means that they have four times the amount of normal DNA. Their average lifespan is from approximately five months, and hepatocytes have a significant regeneration capacity after parenchymal loss by toxic processes, diseases or surgeries. Their cytoplasm is mostly acidophilic. Basophilic regions correspond to the RER and free ribosomes. Mitochondria are abundant in hepatocytes, from 800 to 1000 per cell. They can be detected using Janus green B or enzimo-histochemistry. Hepatocytes possess multiple Golgi complexes, and have large numbers of peroxisomes, which can be detected with immunohistochemistry. Smooth endoplasmic reticulum can be extensive and may contain enzymes involved in degradation and conjugation of toxins and drugs, and other enzymes involved in the synthesis of cholesterol and lipoproteins.\n\nLiver sinusoids are different from the rest of the body’s sinusoids since they have macrophage cells intercalated in between their endothelial cells. Kupffer cells have a different embryological origin, coming from the myeloid line in the reticuloendohelial system (also called mononuclear phagocyte system) and are related to the immune system. They first develop in the bone marrow and then migrate to the liver where they differentiate into Kupffer cells. In fact, they are the macrophages of the liver and are located in the sinusoids. Sinusoids are vascular channels that receive blood from terminal branches of the hepatic artery and portal vein and make it flow to the central veins. The space located between the endothelium is known as the Disse Space. Histologically speaking, Kupffer cells are difficult to identify; however, they are easily seen if there are stained particles that were phagocytosed. The main function of the Kupffer cells is the destruction of old blood cells that go through the liver.\n\nIn the perisinusoidal space, a different type of cells can be found. These cells are characteristic of the liver, since they are not found in any other tissue. These hepatic stellate cells, also named lipocytes, have lipid drops in their cytosol. It is thought that these drops store a fraction of the body’s A vitamin supply. Hepatic stellate cells rest over the Remak trabecules, and they emit extensions to the sinusoids.\n", "id": "39326219", "title": "Liver cytology"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9599860", "text": "Gag-onc fusion protein\n\nThe gag-onc fusion protein (also written as Gag-v-Onc, with \"v\" indicating that the Onc sequence resides in a viral genome) is a general term for a fusion protein formed from a group-specific antigen ('gag') gene and that of an oncogene ('onc'), a gene that plays a role in the development of a cancer. \"Onc\" is a generic placeholder for a given specific oncogene, such as C-jun. (In the case of a fusion with C-jun, the resulting \"gag-jun\" protein is known alternatively as p65).\n\nGag genes are part of a general architecture for retroviruses, viruses that replicate through reverse transcription, where the gag region of the genome encodes proteins that constitute the matrix, capsid and nucleocapsid of the mature virus particles. Like in HIV's replication cycle, these proteins are needed for viral budding from the host cell's plasma membrane, where the fully formed virions leave the cell to infect other cells.\n\nAs a specific case, a Gag-v-Onc fusion protein from the Rous sarcoma virus is useful in illustrating the dual role that the fusion protein plays in both the viral and host cellular life cycle. For example, the viral gene Src (as in \"sarcoma\") is not necessary for viral reproduction, but does affect virulence. Due to evidence of conserved homology between the v-Src gene and its host (animal) genomes, and its non-essential status for viral reproduction, the v-Src gene is likely to have been acquired from a host genome and altered by subsequent mutations. These subsequent mutations are responsible for the oncogenic capabilities of the virus, as the normal (host) version of the Src gene, c-Src promotes survival, angiogenesis, proliferation and invasion pathways. These native pathways are disrupted in the presence of the mutant Src gene (v-Src) such that oncogenesis becomes more likely for the infected host cells, since the v-Src gene is translated into a functionally distinct version of its host counterpart.\n\nWhen a viral gene is introduced into the host cell and is sufficient to induce oncogenesis – the creation of cancerous cells – in the infected cell line, the gene is said to be a \"viral transforming gene\". When this type of gene is translated to a protein, the protein is called a \"transforming protein\". Note that since the viral oncogenes originated from a host genome, the transformation event is different from transduction, which describes the process of introducing non-native genes to a host organism via a viral infection.\n\nIn the case of the murine leukemia viruses, a species of viruses capable of causing cancer in murines (mice), the viral life cycle can also be responsible for oncogenesis through a Gag-v-Onc fusion protein called \"Mo-MuLV(src)\", which is a Gag-v-Src protein capable of inducing oncogenesis in living mice.\n\n", "id": "9599860", "title": "Gag-onc fusion protein"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39002402", "text": "Optical stretcher\n\nThe Optical Stretcher is a dual-beam optical trap that is used for trapping and deforming (\"stretching\") micrometer-sized soft matter particles, such as biological cells in suspension.\nThe forces used for trapping and deforming objects arise from photon momentum transfer on the surface of the objects, making the Optical Stretcher - unlike atomic force microscopy or micropipette aspiration - a tool for contact-free rheology measurements.\n\nThe trapping of micrometer-sized particles by two laser beams was first demonstrated by Arthur Ashkin in 1970,\nbefore he developed the single-beam trap now known as optical tweezers.\nAn advantage of the single-beam design is that no two laser beams need to be exactly adjusted to make their optical axes match.\nFrom the late 1980s on, optical tweezers have been used to trap and hold biological dielectrica, such as cells or viruses.\n\nHowever, in order to ensure trap stability, the single beam must be highly focused, with the particle trapped close to the focus point.\nPreventing damage done to biological material (see Opticution) by the high local light intensities in the focus limits the laser powers that one can use in the optical tweezers to a force range too low for rheology experiments, i.e. optical tweezers are suitable for trapping biological particles, but unsuitable for deforming them.\n\nThe optical stretcher, developed at the end of the 1990s by Jochen Guck and Josef A. Käs,\ncircumvents this problem by going back to the dual-beam design originally developed by Ashkin.\nThis allows for weakly divergent laser, thus preventing damage done by localized light intensities and increasing the possible stretching forces to a range that is sufficient for the deformation of soft matter.\nThe laser powers used in stretching cells are typically on the order of 1 W, generating stretch forces on the order of 100 pN.\nThe resulting relative cellular deformation then usually lies in the range from 1% - 10%.\n\nThe optical stretcher has since been developed into a versatile biophysical tool used by many groups worldwide for contact-free, marker-free measurements of whole-cell rheology.\nUsing automated setups, high throughput rates of more than 100 cells/hour have been achieved, allowing for statistical analysis of the data.\n\nCell mechanics and cell rheology play a crucial role in cellular development and also in many diseases.\nDue to its high throughput, the optical stretcher has in many biomechanical studies been the tool of choice to investigate the development of or changes in cell mechanics, among them studies on the development of cancer and stem cell differentiation.\n\nAn exemplary study in stem cell research sheds light on the process of cell differentiation: Hematopoietic stem cells residing in the bone marrow differentiate into different types of blood cells to produce human blood - i.e., red blood cells and different types of white blood cells. In this study, it was shown that the white blood cell types show different mechanical behaviour depending on their later physiological function and that these differences arise during the process of stem cell differentiation.\n\nUsing the optical stretcher, it was also shown that cancerous cells differ significantly in their mechanical properties from their healthy counterparts.\nThe authors claim that the 'optical deformability' can be used as a biomechanical marker to distinguish cancerous from healthy cells, and even that higher stages of malignancy can be detected.\n\nA typical optical stretcher setup consists of the following main parts:\n\n\nObjects trapped in the optical stretcher usually have diameters on the scale of 10 micrometer, which is very large compared to the laser wavelengths used (often 1064 nm).\nIt is thus sufficient to consider the interaction with the laser light in terms of ray optics.\n\nWhen a ray enters the object, it is refracted due to the different refractive index according to Snell's law.\nBecause photons carry momentum, a change in the direction of propagation of a light ray implies a momentum change, i.e. a force.\nAccording to Newton's third law, a corresponding force pointing in the opposite direction acts on the surface of the object.\nThese surface forces due to photon momentum change are the origin for the ability of the optical stretcher to trap and stretch objects.\n\nAll surface forces can be added up to a resulting force pulling on the center of mass of the object, which is used to trap objects.\nUsually, one uses Gaussian laser beams to trap particles.\nThe most important thing to note is that Gaussian beams have a light intensity gradient, i.e. the light intensity is high in the center of the beam (on the optical axis) and decreases off the axis.\n\nIt can be illustrative to decompose the trapping force into two components called the \"scattering force\" and the \"gradient force\":\nThe rays on the inner side are mostly refracted away from the beam axis (see figure on the right), leading to a corresponding force towards the beam axis on the object.\nThe gradient force thus pulls object onto the beam axis.\n\nThis requires the refractive index of that object to be higher than the index of the surrounding medium - else the refraction would lead to opposite results, pushing particles out of the beam.\nHowever, the refractive index of biological matter is always higher than that of water or cell medium due to the additional protein content.\n\nIn the optical stretcher, two counterpropagating laser beams are used in order to cancel their corresponding scattering forces.\nBecause their gradient forces point in the same direction, pulling particles towards their common beam axis, they add up, and one arrives at a stable trap position.\n\nAn alternative approach to understand the trapping mechanism is to consider the interaction of the particle with the electric fields of the laser beam.\nThis leads to the known fact that electric dipoles (or dielectric, polarizable media like cells) are pulled to the region of highest field intensities, i.e. to the center of the beam.\nSee electric dipole approximation for details.\n\nOnce the particle is stably trapped, there is no net force on the center of mass of the particle.\nHowever, the forces appearing at the surface of the particle do not cancel, and contrary to what one might naively expect, the light does not \"squeeze\" the cell but \"stretch\" it:\n\nThe magnitude of the photon momentum is given by\n\nformula_1\n\nwhere \"h\" is Planck's constant, \"n\" the refractive index of the medium and \"λ\" the wavelength of the light.\nThe photon momentum \"increases\" when the photon enters a medium of higher refractive index.\nConservation of momentum then leads to a surface force acting on the particle, pointing in the opposite direction, i.e. \"outwards\".\nWhen a photon leaves the trapped object, its momentum decreases and again conservation of momentum requires that an outward-pointing force be exerted.\nThus, as all surface forces point outwards, they do not cancel but add up.\n\nThe highest stretching forces can be found on the beam axis, where the light intensity is highest and the rays incide at right angle.\nNear the poles of the cell, where virtually no rays impinge, the surface forces vanish.\n\nDifferent mathematical models have been developed to calculate the stretching forces, based on ray optics\n\nor the solution of Maxwell's equations.\n", "id": "39002402", "title": "Optical stretcher"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39530033", "text": "Biochemical Predestination\n\nBiochemical Predestination is a 1969 book by Dean H. Kenyon and Gary Steinman which argued in support of biochemical evolution.\n\nIn the book, Kenyon and Steinman conclude that \"Life might have been biochemically predestined by the properties of attraction that exist between its chemical parts, especially between amino acids in proteins.\" They argued that life originated with the chemical properties of amino acids causing them to be attracted to each other, forming long protein chains, most important in every living cell. Kenyon believed that proteins were directly formed by attraction between amino acids without DNA coding, and that these were derivatives from non-living raw chemicals in a conducive environment.\n\nIn 1976 Kenyon was persuaded by the young Earth creationist arguments of A. E. Wilder-Smith. In the 1982 foreword he wrote to \"What Is Creation Science?\" by Henry M. Morris and Gary Parker, Kenyon said that he no longer accepted the pro-evolution arguments in \"Biochemical Predestination\". At the \"Edwards v. Aguillard\" trial he provided an affidavit in support of creation science and noted the book as one of his publications. Kenyon subsequently became a co-author of \"Of Pandas and People\" which rebranded creation science as intelligent design.\n\nThe theory propounded was summarized by Stephen Berry, a chemist; \"describing the following causal chain: the properties of the chemical elements dictate the types of monomers that can be formed in prebiotic syntheses, which then dictate the properties of the occurring polymers, which finally dictate the properties of the first eobionts and all succeeding cells.\" Kenyon's work was about virus production.\nIntelligent design proponent Stephen C. Meyer says that the book provided a new approach which came to be known as \"Self-organization\".\nKenyon began to doubt his theory in the mid-1970s after a student posed the question to him as to how the first proteins could have been assembled without specific genetic instructions. On a fellowship at the Graduate Theological Union in Berkeley during the 1969-1970 academic year, he reviewed literature on the relationship of science and religion. He began to rethink his Christian faith, and explored the topic further in a 1974 sabbatical at the University of Oxford. In 1976, a student gave him a book by the young Earth creationist A. E. Wilder-Smith, and \"Eventually, several other books and articles by neo-creationists came to my attention. I read some of Henry Morris’ books, in particular, \"The Genesis Flood\". I’m not a geologist, and I don’t agree with everything in that book, but what stood out was that here was a scientific statement giving a very different view of earth history. Though the book doesn’t deal with the subject of the origin of life per se, it had the effect of suggesting that it is possible to have a rational alternative explanation of the past.\" In 1976 he wrote a new section for Morris and Whitcomb's \"\". In the 1982 foreword he wrote to \"What Is Creation Science?\" by Morris and Gary Parker, Kenyon said that he no longer accepted the pro-evolution arguments in \"Biochemical Predestination\". At the \"Edwards v. Aguillard\" trial he provided an affidavit in support of creation science and noted the book as one of his publications. Kenyon subsequently became a co-author of \"Of Pandas and People\" which rebranded creation science as intelligent design.\n", "id": "39530033", "title": "Biochemical Predestination"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39455714", "text": "Auger architectomics\n\nAuger architectomics is a scientific technique that allows biologists, working in the field of nano-technology, to slice open the cells of living organisms to view and assess their internal workings. Using argon gas etching to open the cells and an electron microscope to create a three-dimensional view, researchers can harness this technique to track how cells function. This is most importantly used to assess how cells react to medication, for instance in the field of cancer research.\n\nIt was first discovered in 2010 by Professor Lodewyk Kock and his team working in the biotechnology department at the University of the Free State in South Africa. The technique was adapted from Nano Scanning Auger Microscopy (NanoSAM), a technique used by physical scientists to study the surface structures of metal and inanimate materials such as semi-conductors. Originally designed to observe yeast cells to find out more about how they manufactured the gas that causes bread to rise, the scientists discovered that the process could also be used in observing other living cells. In 2012 the technique was successfully applied to human cell tissue.\n\nThe project was initiated at the University of the Free State by the Kock group in 1982, with the major inputs and breakthroughs occurring between 2007 and 2012. The initial aim was to explore lipid biochemical routes, which would uncover unique lipids in yeasts, and to develop new taxonomies on the structures of these lipids. This unfolded into the development of the anti-mitochondrial antifungal assay (3A system), where yeast sensors are used to indicate anti-mitochondrial activity in compounds. These compounds, aimed at selectively switching off the mitochondria, therefore, might find application in combating various diseases such as fungal infections and cancer. Auger architectomics, which opens up individual cells to scan them, can be used to assess the effectiveness of such drugs by determining if a single cell can be \"powered down\" with targeted treatment.\n\nBased on the development of the anti-mitochondrial antifungal assay system, the University of the Free State scientists felt there was a need to analyse the system in more detail. As a result, they adapted the Nano Scanning Auger Microscopy, a technique used to scan the properties of metals in physics, to apply it to cells. The result was a combination of auger atom electron physics, electron microscopy, and argon etching.\n\nThe main challenge in applying the technology to biological material was to invent a sample preparation procedure that would ensure that the atom and 3D structure remained stable while argon nano-etching occurred. During the NanoSAM scanning electron microscope visualisation, an electron beam at 25kV is used instead of the normal 5kV beam. Sample fixation and dehydration methods had to be developed and optimised to fit NanoSAM without creating sample distortions. Dehydration regimes based on alcohol extraction procedures were installed and optimised, while fixation using various fixatives was included. Electron conductivity of samples throughout Argon etching was assured by optimised gold sputtering.\n\nFirstly, the biological sample is plated with gold to stabilise the outer structure and make it electron conductive. It is then scanned in SEM mode and the surface visually enlarged. Auger atom electron physics are applied and selected areas on the sample surface are beamed with electrons. The incident beam ejects an electron in the inner orbital of the atom, leaving an open space. This is filled by an electron from an outer orbital by relaxation. Energy is released, causing the ejection of an electron from the outer orbital. This electron is called the auger electron. The amount of energy that is released is measured by auger electron spectroscopy (AES) and used to identify the atom and its intensity. Similarly the surface area can be screened by an electron beam eventually yielding auger electrons that are mapped, showing the distribution of atoms in different colours covering a surface area of predetermined size. The previously-screened surface of the sample is etched with argon, exposing a new surface of the sample that is then again analysed. In this way, a 3-dimensional image and element composition architecture of the whole cell is visualised.\n\nThis process in nanotechnology led to the discovery of gas bubbles inside yeasts. This is considered a paradigm shift, since naked gas bubbles are not expected inside any type of cell due to structured water in the cytoplasm. This was exposed in a fluconazole-treated bubble-like sensor of the yeast \"Nadsonia\". This is the only technology known at present that can accomplish this type of nano-analysis on biological material.\n\nNanotechnology developments in medicine allow microdoses of drugs and therapies to be delivered directly to infected cells, instead of killing large groups of cells, often at the expense of healthy cells. Gold at a nano-level has the ability to bind to certain types of biological material, which means that certain types of cells can be targeted. The technique of auger architectomics may be used to map the success or otherwise of targeted drug delivery by analysing cells. The team at the University of the Free State is working with the Mayo Clinic to use the technology as a part of their cancer research.\n", "id": "39455714", "title": "Auger architectomics"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39983227", "text": "Cellular stress response\n\nCellular stress response is the wide range of molecular changes that cells undergo in response to environmental stressors, including extremes of temperature, exposure to toxins, and mechanical damage. The various processes involved in cellular stress responses serve the adaptive purpose of protecting a cell against unfavorable environmental conditions, both through short term mechanisms that minimize acute damage to the cell's overall integrity, and through longer term mechanisms which provide the cell a measure of resiliency against similar adverse conditions.\n\nCellular stress responses are primarily mediated through what are classified as \"stress proteins\". Stress proteins often are further subdivided into two general categories: those that only are activated by stress, or those that are involved both in stress responses and in normal cellular functioning. The essential character of these stress proteins in promoting the survival of cells has contributed to them being remarkably well conserved across phyla, with nearly identical stress proteins being expressed in the simplest prokaryotic cells as well as the most complex eukaryotic ones.\n\nStress proteins can exhibit widely varied functions within a cell- both during normal life processes and in response to stress. For example, studies in Drosophila have indicated that when DNA encoding certain stress proteins exhibit mutation defects, the resulting cells have impaired or lost abilities such as normal mitotic division and proteasome-mediated protein degradation. As expected, such cells were also highly vulnerable to stress, and ceased to be viable at elevated temperature ranges.\n\nAlthough stress response pathways are mediated in different ways depending on the stressor involved, cell type, etc., a general characteristic of many pathways especially ones where heat is the principle stressor is that they are initiated by the presence and detection of denatured proteins. Because conditions such as high temperatures often cause proteins to denature, this mechanism enables cells to determine when they are subject to high temperature without the need of specialized thermosensitive proteins. Indeed, if a cell under normal (meaning unstressed) conditions has denatured proteins artificially injected into it, it will trigger a stress response.\n\nThe heat shock response involves a class of stress proteins called heat shock proteins. These can help defend a cell against damage by acting as 'chaperons' in protein folding so as to ensure proteins assume their necessary shape and do not become denatured and thus useless to the cell. This role is especially crucial since elevated temperature would, on its own, increase the concentrations of malformed proteins. Heat shock proteins can also participate in marking malformed proteins for degradation via ubiquitin tags.\n\nMany toxins end up activating similar stress proteins to heat or other stress-induced pathways because it is fairly common for some types of toxins to achieve their effects - at least in part - by denaturing vital cellular proteins. For example, many heavy metals can react with sulfhydryl groups stabilizing proteins, resulting in conformational changes, and other toxins that either directly or indirectly lead to the release of free radicals can generate misfolded proteins.\n\nEarly research has suggested that cells which are better able to synthesize stress proteins and do so at the appropriate time are better able to withstand damage caused by ischemia and reperfusion. In addition, many stress proteins overlap with immune proteins. These similarities have medical applications in terms of studying the structure and functions of both immune proteins and stress proteins, as well as the role each plays in combating disease.\n", "id": "39983227", "title": "Cellular stress response"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26682769", "text": "Cytometry\n\nCytometry is the measurement of the characteristics of cells. Variables that can be measured by cytometric methods include cell size, cell count, cell morphology (shape and structure), cell cycle phase, DNA content, and the existence or absence of specific proteins on the cell surface or in the cytoplasm. Cytometry is used to characterize and count blood cells in common blood tests such as the complete blood count. In a similar fashion, cytometry is also used in cell biology research and in medical diagnostics to characterize cells in a wide range of applications associated with diseases such as cancer and AIDS.\n\nImage cytometry is the oldest form of cytometry. Image cytometers operate by statically imaging a large number of\ncells using optical microscopy. Prior to analysis, cells are commonly stained to enhance contrast or \nto detect specific molecules by labeling these with fluorochromes. Traditionally,\ncells are viewed within a hemocytometer to aid manual counting.\n\nSince the introduction of the digital camera, in the mid-1990s, the automation level of\nimage cytometers has steadily increased. This has led to the commercial availability of automated image cytometers, ranging from simple cell counters to sophisticated high-content screening systems.\n\nDue to the early difficulties of automating microscopy, the flow cytometer has since\nthe mid-1950s been the dominating cytometric device.\nFlow cytometers operate by aligning single cells using flow techniques. The cells are characterized\noptically or by the use of an electrical impedance method called the Coulter principle.\nTo detect specific molecules when optically characterized, cells are in most cases stained with the same\ntype of fluorochromes that are used by image cytometers. Flow cytometers generally provide\nless data than image cytometers, but have a significantly higher throughput.\n\nCell sorters are flow cytometers capable of sorting cells according to their characteristics.\nThe sorting is achieved by using technology similar to what is used in inkjet printers.\nThe fluid stream is broken up into droplets by a mechanical vibration.\nThe droplets are then electrically charged according to the characteristics of the cell contained\nwithin the droplet. Depending on their charge, the droplets are finally deflected by an electric field into\ndifferent containers.\n\nConventional flow and image cytometers have the disadvantage of not being able to\nobserve cells over time. The rapid decrease in the cost of\ndigitally storing and processing video information has led to the development of\nimage cytometers which monitor cultured cells using time-lapse video recordings.\nAfter recording, the video is computer processed to track cytometric parameters over time.\nThe historic information available for each cell allow time-lapse cytometers\nto predict the fate of a cell or to characterize its state without using the phototoxic \nfluorochromes that are commonly used by flow and image cytometers.\n\nA key characteristic of time-lapse cytometers is their use of non heat-generating light sources such as light-emitting diodes.\nThis allows a time-lapse cytometer to be placed inside a conventional cell culture incubator\nto facilitate continuous observation of cellular processes without heat building up inside the incubator.\n\nThe early history of cytometry is closely associated with the development of the blood cell counting.\nThrough the work of Karl von Vierordt, Louis-Charles Malassez, Karl Bürker and others blood cell\nconcentration could by the late 19th century be accurately measured using a blood cell counting chamber,\nthe hemocytometer, and an optical microscope.\n\nUntil the 1950s the hemocytometer was the standard method to count blood cells.\nIn blood cell counting applications the hemocytometer has now been replaced by electronic cell counters.\nHowever, the hemocytometer is still being used to count cells in cell culture laboratories.\nSuccessively the manual task of counting, using a microscope, is taken over by small automated image cytometers.\n\nIn 1904, Moritz von Rohr and August Köhler at Carl Zeiss in Jena constructed the first ultraviolet microscope.\nThe intent of the microscope was to obtain higher optical resolution by using illumination with a shorter wavelength than visual light.\nHowever, they experienced difficulties with autofluorescence when observing biological material. Fortunately,\nKöhler saw the potential of fluorescence.\nA filtering technique for fluorescence excitation light was developed by\nHeinrich Lehmann at Zeiss in 1910, based on work by\nRobert Wood. However, the \"Lumineszenzmikroskop\" he developed was only second on the market, after the one independently developed by Oskar Heimstädt who worked at C Reichert, Optische Werke AG in Vienna, which today is a part of Leica Microsystems.\n\nBy the early 1930s various firms manufactured ultraviolet fluorescent microscopes. The stage was\nset for cytometry to now go beyond the now established hemocytometer. At this time, Torbjörn Caspersson,\nworking at the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm, developed a series of progressively more sophisticated\ninstruments called \"cytophotometers\". These instruments combined a fluorescent microscope with a spectrophotometer\nto quantify cellular nucleic acids and their relation to cell growth and function. Caspersson’s early\napparatus now seems hopelessly primitive. But, even this primitive apparatus got results, and attracted\nthe attention of other researchers. Many of the advances in analytical cytology from the 1940s and on-wards\nwere made by people who made the pilgrimage to Stockholm.\n\nThe first attempts to automate cell counting were made around World War II.\nGucker et al. builds a device to detect bacteria in aerosols. Lagercrantz builds an automated\ncell counter based on microcopy and identifies the difficulties\nin aligning cells to be individually counted using microscopy, as Moldavan had proposed in 1934.\nJoseph and Wallace Coulter circumnavigates these difficulties by inventing the principle\nof using electrical impedance to count and size microscopic particles suspended in a fluid. This principle is today\nknown as the Coulter principle and was used in the automated blood cell counter released by Coulter Electronics\nin 1954. The “Coulter counter” was the first commercial flow cytometer.\n\nDuring the 1960s Dittrich, Göhde and Kamentsky improves the design pioneered by Caspersson 30 years earlier.\nDittrich and Göhde’s \"pulse cytophotometer\" was built around a Zeiss fluorescent microscope and commercialized\nas the ICP 11 by Partec GmbH in 1968.\nKamentsky’s device was commercialized by Bio/Physics Systems Inc. as the Cytograph in 1970.\nThese devices were able to count cells, like the earlier Coulter counter. But more importantly, they were also capable of measuring cellular characteristics.\nHowever, these early cytophotometers where microscopy-based.\n\nIn 1953 Crosland-Taylor published an unsuccessful attempt to count red blood cells using microscopy in which he solved the problem of aligning cells by using sheath fluid to hydrodynamically focus the cells. In the late 1960s, Van Dilla at Los Alamos National Laboratory built the first non microscopy-based cytophotometer. He did this by combining Crosland-Taylor's breakthrough with the fluorescent dyes originally developed for microscopy and a laser-based fluorescent detection system — the flow cytometer as we know it today. Fulwyler, at Los Alamos as well, combines the Coulter principle with continuous inkjet printer technology to create the first cell sorter in 1965.\nIn 1973 Steinkamp and the team at Los Alamos follow up with a fluorescence-based cell sorter.\n\nIn 1978, at the Conference of the American Engineering Foundation in Pensacola, Florida, the name \"pulse cytophotometry\"\nwas changed to \"flow cytometry\", a term which quickly became popular. At that point pulse cytophotometry had evolved\ninto the modern form of flow cytometry, pioneered by Van Dilla ten years earlier.\n\n\n", "id": "26682769", "title": "Cytometry"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4414104", "text": "Turgor pressure\n\nTurgor pressure is the force within the cell that pushes the plasma membrane against the cell wall.\n\nIt is also called \"hydrostatic pressure\", and more intricately defined as the pressure measured by a fluid, measured at a certain point within itself when at equilibrium. Generally, turgor pressure is caused by the osmotic flow of water and occurs in plants, fungi, and bacteria. The phenomenon is also observed in protists that have cell walls. This system is not seen in animal cells, seeing how the absence of a cell wall would cause the cell to lyse when under too much pressure. The pressure exerted by the osmotic flow of water is called turgidity. It is caused by the osmotic flow of water through a selectively permeable membrane. Osmotic flow of water through a semipermeable membrane is when the water travels from an area with a low-solute concentration, to one with a higher-solute concentration. In plants, this entails the water moving from the low concentration solute outside the cell, into the cell's vacuole.\n\nOsmosis is the process in which water flows from an area with a low solute concentration, to an adjacent area with a higher solute concentration until equilibrium between the two areas is reached. All cells are surrounded by a lipid bi-layer cell membrane which permits the flow of water in and out of the cell while also limiting the flow of solutes. In hypertonic solutions, water flows out of the cell which decreases the cell's volume. When in a hypotonic solution, water flows into the membrane and increases the cell's volume. When in an isotonic solution, water flows in and out of the cell at an equal rate.\n\nTurgidity is the point at which the cell's membrane pushes against the cell wall, which is when turgor pressure is high. When the cell membrane has low turgor pressure, it is flaccid. In plants, this is shown as wilted anatomical structures. This is more specifically known as plasmolysis.The volume and geometry of the cell affects the value of turgor pressure, and how it can have an effect on the cell wall's plasticity. Studies have shown how smaller cells experience a stronger elastic change when compared to larger cells.\n\nTurgor pressure also plays a key role in plant cell growth where the cell wall undergoes irreversible expansion due to the force of turgor pressure as well as structural changes in the cell wall that alter its extensibility.\n\nTurgor pressure within cells is regulated by osmosis and also causes the cell wall to expand during growth. Along with size, rigidity of the cell is also caused by turgor pressure; a lower pressure results in a wilted cell or plant structure (i.e. leaf, stalk). One mechanism in plants that regulate turgor pressure is its semipermeable membrane, which only allows some solutes to travel in and out of the cell, which can also maintain a minimum amount of pressure. Other mechanisms include transpiration, which results in water loss and decreases turgidity in cells. Turgor pressure is also a large factor for nutrient transport throughout the plant. Cells of the same organism can have differing turgor pressures throughout the organism's structure. In higher plants, turgor pressure is responsible for apical growth of things such as root tips and pollen tubes.\n\nTransport proteins that pump solutes into the cell can be regulated by cell turgor pressure. Lower values allow for an increase in the pumping of solutes; which in turn increases osmotic pressure. This function is important as a plant response when under drought conditions (seeing as turgor pressure is maintained), and for cells which need to accumulate solutes (i.e. developing fruits).\n\nIt has been recorded that the petals of \"Gentiana kochiana\" and \"Kalanchoe blossfeldiana\" bloom via volatile turgor pressure of cells on the plant's adaxial surface. During processes like anther dehiscence, it has been observed that drying endothecium cells cause an outward bending force which led to the release of pollen. This means that lower turgor pressures are observed in these structures due to the fact that they are dehydrated. Pollen tubes are cells which elongate when pollen lands on the stigma, at the carpal tip. These cells grow rather quickly due to increases turgor pressure. These cells undergo tip growth. The pollen tube of lilies can have a turgor pressure of 0–21 MPa when growing during this process.\n\nIn fruits such as \"Impatiens parviflora\", \"Oxalia acetosella\" and \"Ecballium elaterium\", turgor pressure is the method by which seeds are dispersed. In \"Ecballium elaterium\", or squirting cucumber, turgor pressure builds up in the fruit to the point that aggressively detaches from the stalk, and seeds and water are squirted everywhere as the fruit falls to the ground. Turgor pressure within the fruit ranges from .003 to 1.0 MPa.\n\nTurgor pressure's actions on extensible cell walls is usually said to be the driving force of growth within the cell. An increase of turgor pressure causes expansion of cells and extension of apical cells, pollen tubes, and in other plant structures such as root tips. Cell expansion and an increase in turgor pressure is due to inward diffusion of water into the cell, and turgor pressure increases due to the increasing volume of vacuolar sap. A growing root cell's turgor pressure can be up to 0.6 MPa, which is over three times that of a car tire. Epidermal cells in a leaf can have pressures ranging from 1.5 to 2.0 MPa. As plants can operate at such high pressures, this can explain why they can grow through asphalt and other hard surfaces.\n\nThis is observed in a cell where the cell membrane is pushed against the cell wall. In some plants, their cell walls loosen at a quicker rate than water can cross the membrane, which results in a cell with lower turgor pressure.\n\nTurgor pressure within the stomata regulates when the stomata can open and close, which has a play in transpiration rates of the plant. This is also important because this function regulates water loss within the plant. Lower turgor pressure can mean that the cell has a low water concentration and closing the stomata would help to preserve water. High turgor pressure keeps the stomata open for gas exchanges necessary for photosynthesis.\n\nIt has been concluded that loss of turgor pressure within the leaves of \"Mimosa pudica\" is responsible for the reaction the plant has when touched. Other factors such as changes in osmotic pressure, protoplasmic contraction and increase in cellular permeability have been observed to affect this response. It has also been recorded that turgor pressure is different in the upper and lower pulvinar cells of the plant, and the movement of potassium and calcium ions throughout the cells cause the increase in turgor pressure. When touched, the pulvinus is activated and exudes contractile proteins, which in turn increases turgor pressure and closes the leaves of the plant.\n\nAs earlier stated, turgor pressure can be found in other organisms besides plants, and can play a large role in the development, movement and nature of said organisms.\n\nIn fungi, tugor pressure has been observed as a large factor in substrate penetration. In species such as \"Saprolegnia ferax, Magnaporthe grisea\" and \"Aspergillus oryzae,\" immense turgor pressures have been observed in their hyphae. The study showed that they could penetrate substances like plant cells, and synthetic materials such as polyvinyl chloride. In observations of this phenomenon, it is noted that invasive hyphal growth is due to turgor pressure, along with the coenzymes secreted by the fungi to invade said substrates. Hyphal growth is directed related to turgor pressure, and growth slows as turgor pressure decreases. In \"Magnaporthe grisea\", pressures of up to 8 MPa have been observed.\n\nSome protists do not have cell walls and cannot experience turgor pressure. These few protists are ones that use their contractile vacuole to regulate the quantity of water within the cell. Protist cells avoid lysing in solutions by utilizing a vacuole which pumps water out of the cells to maintain osmotic equilibrium.\n\nTurgor pressure is not observed in animal cells because they lack a cell wall. In organisms with cell walls, the cell wall prevents the cell from lysing from high pressure values.\n\nIn Diatoms, the Heterokontophyta have polyphyletic turgor-resistant cell walls. Throughout these organisms' life cycle, carefully controlled turgor pressure is responsible for cell expansion and for the release of sperm, but not for things such as seta growth.\n\nGas-vaculate cyanobacterium are the ones generally responsible for water-blooms. They have the ability to float due to the accumulation of gases within their vacuole, and the role of turgor pressure and its effect on the capacity of these vacuoles has been observed in varying scientific papers. It is noted that the higher the turgor pressure, the lower the capacity of the gas-vacuoles in different cyanobacterium. Experiments used to correlate osmosis and turgor pressure in prokaryotes have been used to show how diffusion of solutes into the cell have a play on turgor pressure within the cell.\n\nWhen measuring turgor pressure in plants, many things have to be taken into account. It is generally stated that fully turgid cells have a turgor pressure value which is equal to that of the cell, and that flaccid cells have a value at or near zero. Other cellular mechanisms taken into consideration include the protoplast, solutes within the protoplast (solute potential), transpiration rates of the plant, and the tension of cell walls. Measurement is limited depending on the method used, some of which are explored and explained below. Not all methods can be used for all organisms, due to size and other properties. For example, a diatom doesn't have the same properties as a plant, which would place constrictions on what could be used to infer turgor pressure.\n\nUnits used to measure turgor pressure are independent from the measures used to infer its values. Common units include bars, MPa, or newtons. 1 bar is equal to .1 MPa.\n\nTurgor pressure can be deduced when total water potential, Ψ, and osmotic potential, Ψ, are known in a water potential equation. These equations are used to measure the total water potential of a plant by using variables such as matric potential, osmotic potential, pressure potential, gravitational effects and turgor pressure. After taking the difference between Ψ and Ψ, the value for turgor pressure is given. When using this method, gravity and matric potential are considered to be negligible, since their values are generally either negative or close to zero.\n\nThe pressure bomb was developed by plant physiologist Lan Wang and colleagues in order to test water movement through plants. The instrument is used to measure turgor pressure by placing a leaf (with stem attached) into a closed chamber where pressurized gas is added in increments. Measurements are taken when xylem sap appears out of the cut surface and at the point which it doesn't accumulae or retreat back into the cut surface.\n\nAtomic force microscopes use a type of scanning probe microscopy (SPM). Small probes are introduced to the area of interest, and a spring within the probe measures values via displacement. This method can be used to measure turgor pressure of organisms. When using this method, supplemental information such as continuum mechanic equations, single force depth curves and cell geometries can be used to quantify turgor pressures within a given area (usually a cell).\n\nThis machine was originally used to measure individual algal cells, but can now be used on larger-celled specimens. It is usually used on higher plant tissues, but wasn't used to measure turgor pressure until Hüsken and Zimmerman improved on the method. Pressure probes measure turgor pressure via displacement. A glass micro-capillary tube is inserted into the cell and whatever the cell exudes into the tube is observed through a microscope. An attached device then measures how much pressure is required to push the emission back into the cell.\n\nThese are used to accurately quantify measurements of smaller cells. In an experiment by Weber, Smith and colleagues, single tomato cells were compressed between a micro-manipulation probe and glass to allow the pressure probe's micro-capillary to find the cell's turgor pressure.\n\nIt has been observed that the value of Ψ decreases as the cell becomes more dehydrated, but scientists have speculated whether this value will continue to decrease but never fall to zero, or if the value can be less than zero. There have been studies which show that negative cell pressures can exist in xerophytic plants, but a paper by M. T. Tyree explores whether this is possible, or a conclusion based on misinterpreted data. In his paper, he concludes that by miscategorizing \"bound\" and \"free\" water in a cell, researchers that claimed to have found negative turgor pressure values were incorrect. By analyzing isotherms of apoplastic and symplastic water, he shows that negative turgor pressures cannot be present within arid plants due to net water loss of the specimen during droughts. Despite his analyzation and interpretation of data, and negative turgor pressure values are still used within the scientific community.\n\nAn hypothesis formed by M. Harold and his colleagues suggests that tip growth in higher plans is amoebic in nature, and isn't caused by turgor pressure as is widely believed, meaning that extension is caused by the actin cytoskeleton in these plant cells. Regulation of cell growth is implied to be caused by cytoplasmic micro-tubules which control the orientation of cellulose fibrils, which are deposited into the adjacent cell wall and results in growth. In plants, the cells are surrounded by cell walls and filamentous proteins which retain and adjust the plant cell's growth and shape. As explained in the paper, lower plants grow through apical growth, which differs since the cell wall only expands on one end of the cell.\n", "id": "4414104", "title": "Turgor pressure"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40436928", "text": "Immunogenic cell death\n\nImmunogenic cell death or immunogenic apoptosis is a form of cell death caused by some cytostatic agents such as anthracyclines, oxaliplatin and bortezomib, or radiotherapy and photodynamic therapy (PDT). Unlike normal apoptosis, which is mostly nonimmunogenic or even tolerogenic, immunogenic apoptosis of cancer cells can induce an effective antitumour immune response through activation of dendritic cells (DCs) and consequent activation of specific T cell response.\nMost of the agents inducing immunogenic cell death are targeting endoplasmic reticulum (ER), leading to ER stress and production of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Both ER stress and ROS production are key players of intracellular signaling pathways that govern ICD.\nICD is characterized by secretion of damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs).There are three most important DAMPs which are exposed to the cell surface during ICD. Calreticulin (CRT), one of the DAMP molecules, which is normally in the lumen of endoplasmic reticulum (ER), is translocated after the induction of immunogenic apoptosis to the surface of dying cell where it functions as an “eat me” signal for professional phagocytes. Other important surface exposed DAMPs are heat-shock proteins (HSPs), namely HSP70 and HSP90, which are under stress condition also translocated to the plasma membrane. On the cell surface they have an immunostimulatory effect, based on their interaction with number of antigen-presenting cell (APC) surface receptors like CD91 and CD40 and also facilitate crosspresentation of antigens derived from tumour cells on MHC class I molecule, which than leads to the CD8+ T cell response. Other important DAMPs, characteristic for ICD are secreted amphoterin (HMGB1) and ATP. HMGB1 is considered to be late apoptotic marker and its release to the extracellular space seems to be required for the optimal release and presentation of tumour antigens to dendritic cells. It binds to several pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) such as Toll-like receptor (TLR) 2 and 4, which are expressed on APCs. The most recently found DAMP released during immunogenic cell death is ATP, which functions as a “find-me” signal for monocytes when secreted and induces their attraction to the site of apoptosis.\n\nThe concept of ICD has started taking shape over past few years, there were found some inducers mentioned above, which have a potential as anti-tumour vaccination strategies.\n", "id": "40436928", "title": "Immunogenic cell death"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40558045", "text": "Myeloid-derived suppressor cell\n\nMDSC (myeloid-derived suppressor cells) are a heterogenous group of immune cells from the myeloid lineage (a family of cells that originate from bone marrow stem cells).\n\nMDSCs strongly expand in pathological situations such as chronic infections and cancer, as a result of an altered haematopoiesis. MDSCs are discriminated from other myeloid cell types in which they possess strong immunosuppressive activities rather than immunostimulatory properties. Similar to other myeloid cells, MDSCs interact with other immune cell types including T cells, dendritic cells, macrophages and natural killer cells to regulate their functions. Although their mechanisms of action are not clear yet, clinical and experimental evidence has shown that cancer tissues with high infiltration of MDSCs are associated with poor patient prognosis and resistance to therapies.\n\nIt is yet unclear whether MDSCs represent a group of immature myeloid cell types that have stopped their differentiation, or they represent a distinctive myeloid lineage.\n\nIn mouse models, MDSCs are found as myeloid cells expressing high levels of CD11b (a classical myeloid lineage marker) and GR1 (granulocytic marker). The GR1 marker is made up of two cell membrane molecules, Ly6C and Ly6G, and according to their relative expression levels murine MDSCs are further classified into two subtypes, monocytic and granulocytic. Monocytic MDSCs express high levels of the Ly6C surface marker with low or no expression of the Ly6G marker, while granulocytic MDSCs express Ly6C and high levels of Ly6G. These phenotypes are reminiscent of those from inflammatory monocytes (and hence the term \"monocytic MDSC\") and granulocytes (for \"granulocytic MDSCs), respectively.\n\nHuman MDSCs are less characterized, and they are generally defined as myeloid cells expressing CD33, CD14 and low levels of HLA DR. The absence of the human equivalent to the murine GR1 marker makes it difficult to compare murine and human MDSCs. Although they functionally resemble murine MDSCs, their characterization and classification into different subsets remains to be resolved as there is no international consensus on how human subsets of MDSC should be defined.\n\nGenerally speaking, regardless of whether they are from mice or human, MDSC suppressor function lies in their ability to inhibit T cell proliferation and activation. In healthy individuals, immature myeloid cells formed in the bone marrow differentiate to dendritic cells, macrophages and neutrophils. However, under chronic inflammatory conditions (viral and bacterial infections) or cancer, myeloid differentiation is skewed towards the expansion of MDSCs. These MDSCs infiltrate inflammation sites and tumors, where they stop immune responses by inhibiting T cells and NK cells, for example. MDSCs also accelerate angiogenesis, tumor progression and metastasis through the expression of cytokines and factors such as TGF-beta. Therefore, they have become a key therapeutic target.\n\nMDSCs derive from bone marrow precursors usually as the result of a perturbed myeloipoiesis caused by different pathologies. In cancer patients, growing tumours secrete a variety of cytokines and other molecules which are key signals involved in the generation of MDSC. Tumor cell lines overexpressing colony stimulating factors (e.g. G-CSF and GM-CSF) have long been used in in vivo models of MDSC generation. GM-CSF, G-CSF and IL-6 allow the in vitro generation of MDSC that retain their suppressive function in vivo. In addition to CSF, other cytokines such as IL-6, IL-10, VEGF, PGE2 and IL-1 have been implicated in the development and regulation of MDSC. The myeloid-differentiation cytokine GM-CSF is a key factor in MDSC production from bone marrow, and it has been shown that the c/EBPβ transcription factor plays a key role in the generation of in vitro bone marrow-derived and in vivo tumor-induced MDSC. Moreover, STAT3 promotes MDSC differentiation and expansion and IRF8 has been suggested to counterbalance MDSC-inducing signals.\n\nMurine MDSCs show two distinct phenotypes which discriminate them into either monocytic MDSCs or granulocytic MDSCs. The relationship between these two subtypes remains controversial, as they closely resemble monocytes and neutrophils respectively. While monocyte and neutrophil differentiation pathways within the bone marrow are antagonistic and dependent on the relative expression of IRF8 and c/EBP transcription factors (and hence there is not a direct precursor-progeny link between these two myeloid cell types), this seems not to be the case for MDSCs. Monocytic MDSCs seem to be precursors of granulocytic subsets demonstrated both in vitro and in vivo. This differentiation process is accelerated upon tumour infiltration and possibly driven by the hypoxic tumor microenvironment.\n\nMDSC activity was originally described as suppressors of T cells, in particular of CD8+ T-cell responses. the spectrum of action of MDSC activity also encompasses NK cells, dendritic cells and macrophages.\nSuppressor activity of MDSC is determined by their ability to inhibit the effector function of lymphocytes. Inhibition can be caused different mechanisms. It is primarily attributed to the effects of the metabolism of L-arginine. Another important factor influencing the activity of MDSC is oppressive ROS.\n\nIn addition to host-derived factors, pharmacologic agents also have profound impact on MDSC. Chemotherapeutic agents belonging to different classes have been reported to inhibit MDSC. Although this effect may well be secondary to inhibition of hematopoietic progenitors, there may be grounds for search of selectivity based on long-known differential effects of these agents on immunocompetent cells and macrophages. Recently, MDSCs were compared to immunogenic myeloid cells highlighting a group of core signaling pathways that control pro-carcinogenic MDSC functions. Many of these pathways are known targets of chemotherapy drugs with strong anti-cancer properties.\n", "id": "40558045", "title": "Myeloid-derived suppressor cell"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40663752", "text": "Hemogenic endothelium\n\nHemogenic endothelium is a special subset of endothelial cells scattered within blood vessels that can differentiate into haematopoietic cells.\n\nThe development of hematopoietic cells in the embryo proceeds sequentially from mesoderm through the hemangioblast to the hemogenic endothelium and hematopoietic progenitors.\n\nHemangioblast\n", "id": "40663752", "title": "Hemogenic endothelium"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40568371", "text": "Activation-induced cell death\n\nAICD (activation-induced cell death) is programmed cell death caused by the interaction of Fas receptors (Fas, CD95) and Fas ligands (FasL, CD95 ligand). AICD is a negative regulator of activated T lymphocytes that results from repeated stimulation of their T-cell receptors (TCR) and helps to maintain peripheral immune tolerance. Alteration of the process may lead to autoimmune diseases.\n\nThe AICD effector cell is one that expresses FasL, and apoptosis is induced in the cell expressing the Fas receptor. Both activated T cells and B cells express Fas and undergo clonal deletion by the AICD mechanism. Activated T cells that express both Fas and FasL may be killed by themselves or by each other.\n\nThe binding of Fas ligand to Fas receptor triggers trimerization of Fas, whose cytoplasmic domain is then able to bind the death domain of the adaptor protein FADD (Fas-associated protein with death domain). Procaspase 8 binds to FADD's death effector domain (DED) and proteolytically self-activates as caspase 8. Fas, FADD, and procaspase 8 together form a death-inducing signaling complex (DISC). Activated caspase 8 is released into the cytosol, where it activates the caspase cascade that initiates apoptosis.\n\nFasL is primarily regulated at the transcriptional level. (The other option is regulation of the signal emanating from the death receptor itself, controlling sensitivity to the induction of apoptosis.) NFAT activated by TCR stimulation activates FasL transcription, possibly indirectly by upregulating early growth response proteins. T cell activation-induced transcription of FasL is further regulated by c-Myc–MAX heterodimers, and can be blocked by c-Myc downregulation. Interferon regulatory factors IRF1 and IRF2 also upregulate FasL transcription by directly binding to the FasL promoter. \n\nNot much is known about the regulation of Fas and other death receptors. However, overexpression of the protein CFLAR (caspase and FADD-like apoptosis regulator) inhibits Fas-mediated apoptosis.\n\n", "id": "40568371", "title": "Activation-induced cell death"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35128374", "text": "Intercellular cleft\n\nAn intercellular cleft is a channel between two cells through which molecules may travel and gap junctions and tight junctions may be present. Most notably, intercellular clefts are found between epithelial cells and the endothelium of blood vessels and lymphatic vessels, also helping to form the blood-nerve barrier surrounding nerves. Intercellular clefts are important for allowing the transportation of fluids and small solute matter through the endothelium.\n\nThe dimensions of intercellular clefts vary throughout the body, however cleft lengths have been determined for a series of capillaries. The average cleft length for capillaries is about 20m/cm. The depths of the intercellular clefts, measured from the luminal to the abluminal openings, vary among different types of capillaries, but the average is about 0.7 μm. The width of the intercellular clefts is about 20 nm outside the junctional region (i.e. in the larger part of the clefts). In intercellular clefts of capillaries, it has been calculated that the fractional area of the capillary wall occupied by the intercellular cleft is 20m/cm x 20 nm (length x width)= 0.004 (0.4%). This is the fractional area of the capillary wall exposed for free diffusion of small hydrophilic solutes and fluids.\n\nThe intercellular cleft is imperative for cell-cell communication. The cleft contains gap junctions, tight junctions, desmosomes, and adheren proteins, all of which help to propagate and/or regulate cell communication through signal transduction, surface receptors, or a chemogradient. In order for a molecule to be taken into the cell either by endocytosis, phagocytosis, or receptor-mediated endocytosis, often that molecule must first enter through the cleft. The intercellular cleft itself is a channel, but what flows through the channel, like ions, fluid, and small molecules and what proteins or junctions give order to the channel is critical for the life of the cells that border the intercellular cleft.\n\nResearch at the cell level can deliver proteins, ions, or specific small molecules into the intercellular cleft as a means of injecting a cell. This method is especially useful in cell-to-cell propagation of infectious cytosolic protein aggregates. In one study, protein aggregates from yeast prions were released into a mammalian intercellular cleft and were taken up by the adjacent cell, as opposed to direct cell transfer. This process would be similar to the secretion and transmission of infectious particles through the synaptic cleft between cells of the immune system, as seen in retroviruses. Understanding the routes of intercellular protein aggregate transfer, particularly routes involving clefts is imperative in understanding the progressive spreading of this infection.\n\nEndothelial tight junctions are most commonly found in the intercellular cleft and provide for regulation of diffusion through the membranes. These links are most commonly found in the most apical aspect of the intercellular cleft. They prevent macromolecules from navigating the intercellular cleft and limit the lateral diffusion of intrinsic membrane proteins and lipids between the apical and basolateral cell surface domains. In the intercellular clefts of capillaries, tight junctions are the first structural barriers a neutrophil encounters as it penetrates the interendothelial cleft, or the gap linking the blood vessel lumen with the subendothelial space. In capillary endothelium, plasma communicates with the interstitial fluid through the intercellular cleft. Blood plasma without the plasma proteins, red blood cells, and platelets pass through the intercellular cleft and into the capillary.\n\nMost notably, intercellular clefts are described in capillary blood vessels. The three types of capillary blood vessels are continuous, fenestrated, and discontinuous, with continuous being the least porous of the three and discontinuous capillaries being extremely high in permeability. Continuous blood capillaries have the smallest intercellular clefts, with discontinuous blood capillaries having the largest intercellular clefts, commonly accompanied with gaps in the basement membrane.Often, fluid is forced out of the capillaries through the intercellular clefts. Fluid is push out through the intercellular cleft at the arterial end of the capillary because that's where the pressure is the highest. However, most of this fluid returns into the capillary at the venous end, creating capillary fluid dynamics. Two opposing forces achieve this balance; hydrostatic pressure and colloid osmotic pressure, using the intercellular clefts are fluid entrances and fluid exits. In addition, the size of the intercellular clefts and pores in the capillary will influence this fluid exchange. The larger the intercellular cleft, the lesser the pressure and the more fluid will flow out the cleft. This enlargement of the cleft is caused by contraction of capillary endothelial cells, often by substances such as histamine and bradykinin. However, smaller intercellular clefts do not help this fluid exchange. Along with fluid, electrolytes are also carried through this transport in the capillary blood vessels. This mechanism of fluid, electrolyte, and also small solute exchange is especially important in renal glomerular capillaries.\n\nIntercellular clefts also play a role in the formation of the \"blood-heart barrier\" (BHB). The intercellular cleft between endocardial endotheliocytes is 3 to 5 times deeper than the clefts between myocardial capillary endotheliocytes. Also, these clefts are often more twisting and have one or two tight junctions and zona adherens interacting with a circumferential actin filament band and several connecting proteins. These tight junctions localize to the luminal side of the intercellular clefts, where the glycocalyx, which is important in cell-cell recognition and cell signaling, is more developed. The organization of the endocardial endothelium and the intercellular cleft help to establish the \"blood-heart barrier\" by ensuring an active transendothelial physicochemical gradient of various ions.\n\n", "id": "35128374", "title": "Intercellular cleft"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35369355", "text": "Nuclear equivalence\n\nAccording to the principle of nuclear equivalence, the nuclei of essentially all differentiated adult cells of an individual are genetically (though not necessarily metabolically) identical to one another and to the nucleus of the zygote from which they descended. This means that virtually all somatic cells in an adult have the same genes. However, different cells express different subsets of these genes.\n\nThe evidence for nuclear equivalence comes from cases in which differentiated cells or their nuclei have been found to retain the potential of directing the development of the entire organism. Such cells or nuclei are said to exhibit totipotency.\n", "id": "35369355", "title": "Nuclear equivalence"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40616056", "text": "Oxidation response\n\nOxidation response is stimulated by a disturbance in the balance between the production of reactive oxygen species and antioxidant responses, known as oxidative stress. Active species of oxygen naturally occur in aerobic cells and have both intracellular and extracellular sources. These species, if not controlled, damage all components of the cell, including proteins, lipids and DNA. Hence cells need to maintain a strong defense against the damage. \nThe following table gives an idea of the antioxidant defense system in bacterial system.\nSmall changes in cellular oxidant status can be sensed by specific proteins which regulate a set of genes encoding antioxidant enzymes. Such a global response induces an adaptive metabolism including ROS elimination, the bypass of injured pathways, reparation of oxidative damages and maintenance of reducing power.\n\nPeroxide and superoxide are the two major active oxygen species. It is found that the peroxide and superoxide stress responses are distinct in bacteria. The exposure of microorganisms to low sublethal concentrations of oxidants leads to the acquisition of cellular resistance to a subsequent lethal oxidative stress.\n\nIn response to an increased flux of HO and other organic peroxides such as tert-butyl hydroperoxide and cumene hydroperoxide, peroxide stimulon gets activated. Studies of E. coli response to HO have shown that exposure to HO elevated mRNA levels of 140 genes, of which 30 genes are members of the OxyR regulon. The genes include many genes coding for metabolic enzymes and antioxidant enzymes demonstrating the role of these enzymes in reorganization of metabolism under stress conditions.\n\nWhen stressed under elevated levels of the superoxide radical anion O, bacteria respond by invoking the superoxide stimulon. Superoxide-generating compounds activate SoxR regulator by the one-electron oxidation of the 2Fe-2S clusters. Oxidized SoxR then induces the expression of SoxS protein, which in turn activates the transcription of structural genes of the SoxRS regulon.\n\nThe transcriptional factor OxyR regulates the expression of OxyR regulon. HO oxidizes the transcriptional factor by forming an intramolecular disulfide bond. The oxidized form of this factor specifically binds to the promoters of constituent genes of OxyR regulon, including \"katG\" (hydroperoxidase-catalase HPІ), \"gorA\" (glutathione reductase), \"grxA\" (glutaredoxin 1), \"trxC\"(thioredoxin 2), \"ahpCF\" (alkyl hydroperoxide reductase), \"dps\" (nonspecific DNA binding protein) and \"oxyS\" (a small regulatory RNA). Reduced OxyR provides autorepression by binding only to the \"oxyR\" promoter.\n\nRegulation of the \"soxRS\" regulon occurs by a two-stage process: the SoxR protein is first converted to an oxidized form that enhances \"soxS\" transcription, and the increased level of SoxS protein in turn activates the expression of the regulon. The structural genes under this regulon include \"sodA\" (Mn-superoxide dismutase(SOD)), \"zwf\" (glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase(G6PDH)), \"acnA\" (aconitase A), \"nfsA\" (nitrate reductase A), \"fumC\" (fumarase C) and \"nfo\" (endonuclease IV) among others. In E.coli, negative autoregulation of SoxS protein serves as a dampening mechanism for the \"soxRS\" redox stress response.\n\nSoxRS regulon genes can be regulated by additional factors.\n\nAt least three known genes including \"xthA\" and \"katE\" are regulated by a sigma factor, KatF(RpoS), whose synthesis is turned on during the stationary phase. XthA (exonuclease III, a DNA repair enzyme) and KatE (catalase) are known to play important roles in the defense against oxidative stress but interestingly KatF regulon genes are not induced by oxidative stress.\n\nThere is an overlap between oxidative stress response and other regulatory networks like heat shock response, SOS response.\n\nThe defenses against deleterious effects of active oxygen can be logically divided into two broad classes, preventive and reparative.\nCellular defenses against the damaging effects of oxidative stress involve both enzymatic and nonenzymatic components.\n\nThe enzymatic components may directly scavenge active oxygen species or may act by producing the nonenzymatic antioxidants. There are four enzymes that provide the bulk of protection against deleterious reactions involving active oxygen in bacteria: SODs (superoxide dismutases encoded by \"sodA\" and \"sodB\"), catalases (\"katE\" and \"katG\"), glutathione synthetase (\"gshAB\") and glutathione reductase (\"gor\"). Some bacteria have NADH-dependent peroxidases specific for HO.\n\nThe main nonenzymatic antioxidants in E. coli are GSH and thioredoxin (encoded by \"trxA\"). Ubiquinone and menaquinone may also serve as membrane-associated antioxidants.\n\nSecondary defenses include DNA-repair systems, proteolytic and lipolytic enzymes. DNA repair enzymes include endonuclease IV, induced by oxidative stress, and exonuclease III, induced in the stationary phase and in starving cells. These enzymes act on duplex DNA and clean up DNA 3' terminal ends.\n\nProkaryotic cells contain catalysts that modify the primary structure of proteins frequently by reducing disulfide bonds. This occurs in the following steps:\n\n(i) thioredoxin reductase transfers electrons from NADPH to thioredoxin via a flavin carrier\n\n(ii) glutaredoxin is also able to reduce disulfide bonds, but using GSH as an electron donor\n\n(iii) protein disulfide isomerase facilitates disulfide exchange reactions with large inactive protein substrates, besides having chaperone activity\n\nOxidation of surface exposed methionine residues surrounding the entrance to the active site could function as a “last-chance” antioxidant defense system for proteins.\n\nThe complexity in bacterial responses appears to be in the number of proteins induced by oxidative stress. In mammalian cells, the number of proteins induced is small but the regulatory pathways are highly complex.\n\nThe inducers of oxidative stress responses in bacteria appear to be either the oxidant itself or interaction of the oxidant with a cell component. Most mammalian cells exist in an environment where the oxygen concentration is constant, thus responses are not directly stimulated by oxidants. Rather, cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor, interleukin-1 or bacterial polysaccharides induce SOD synthesis and multigene responses. Recent work shows that superoxide is a strong tumor promoter that works by activation and induction growth-competence related gene products. Other factors involved in the antioxidant gene expression include an induction of calmodulin kinase by increase in Ca concentrations.\n\nE. coli cells have revealed interesting similarities to the aging process of higher organisms. The similarities include increased oxidation of cellular constituents and its target specificity, the role of antioxidants and oxygen tension in determining life span, and an apparent trade-off\nbetween activities related to reproduction and survival.\n", "id": "40616056", "title": "Oxidation response"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40887171", "text": "Cytoplasmic determinant\n\nCytoplasmic determinants are special molecules which play a very important role during oocyte maturation, in the female's ovary. During this period of time, some regions of the cytoplasm accumulate some of these cytoplasmic determinants, whose distribution is thus very heterogenic. They play a major role in the development of the embryo's organs. Each type of cell is determined by a particular determinant or group of determinants. Thus, all the organs of the future embryo are distributed and operating well thanks to the right position of the cytoplasmic determinants. The action of the determinants on the blastomeres is one of the most important ones. During the segmentation, cytoplasmic determinants are distributed among the blastomeres, at different times depending on the species and on the type of determinant. Therefore, the daughter cells resulting from the first divisions are totipotent : they can, independently, lead to a complete individual. That is not possible after the cytoplasmic determinants have been distributed in the differentiated blastomeres.\n\nDuring the mosaic development, the future embryo contains all the distinct cytoplasmic determinants that are distributed in distinct cells. Regions of the organism differentiate very quickly if each cell contains specific cytoplasmic determinants since the first divisions : then the cell divides to give all the other cell of its type, and the same process happens in all types of cells in the organism.\nAs a result, in the case of the mosaic development, cell totipotence disappears very quickly during segmentation. Indeed, each new created cell determines a new region of the future organism, and it is independent from the other ones : thus development is independent from interaction between cells. It is most of all known in certain animals as nematodes \"C. elegans\", or ascidians (marine animals).\n\nOther animals show regulation development; their cells show totipotence for a longer time. In these animals, cytoplasmic determinants are more rapidly distributed between newly created cells. Mammals are an example of animals that undergo regulation development.\n\nThe zygote already contains the future organization of the embryo, through cytoplasmic determinants distribution. Presumptive Territories Maps could be established simply by coloring particular regions of the zygote's cytoplasm.\n\nBiology website, embryogenesis part : http://www.botanic06.com/site/EvolVie/physio/embryo5.htm\n", "id": "40887171", "title": "Cytoplasmic determinant"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=599709", "text": "Karyogamy\n\nKaryogamy is the final step in the process of fusing together two haploid eukaryotic cells, and refers specifically to the fusion of the two nuclei. Before karyogamy, each haploid cell has one complete copy of the organism's genome. In order for karyogamy to occur, the cell membrane and cytoplasm of each cell must fuse with the other in a process known as plasmogamy. Once within the joined cell membrane, the nuclei are referred to as pronuclei. Once the cell membranes, cytoplasm, and pronuclei fuse together, the resulting single cell is diploid, containing two copies of the genome. This diploid cell, called a zygote or zygospore can then enter meiosis (a process of chromosome duplication, recombination, and division, to produce four new haploid cells), or continue to divide by mitosis. Mammalian fertilization uses a comparable process to combine haploid sperm and egg cells (gametes) to create a diploid fertilized egg.\n\nThe term karyogamy comes from the Greek \"karyo-\" (from κάρυον \"karyon\") meaning \"nut\" and γάμος \"gamos\", meaning \"marriage\".\n\nHaploid organisms such as fungi, yeast, and algae can have complex cell cycles, in which the choice between sexual or asexual reproduction is fluid, and often influenced by the environment. Some organisms, in addition to their usual haploid state, can also exist as diploid for a short time, allowing genetic recombination to occur. Karyogamy can occur within either mode of reproduction: during the sexual cycle or in somatic (non-reproductive) cells.\n\nThus, karyogamy is the key step in bringing together two sets of different genetic material which can recombine during meiosis. In haploid organisms that lack sexual cycles, karyogamy can also be an important source of genetic variation during the process of forming somatic diploid cells. Formation of somatic diploids circumvents the process of gamete formation during the sexual reproduction cycle and instead creates variation within the somatic cells of an already developed organism, such as a fungus.\n\nThe role of karyogamy in sexual reproduction can be demonstrated most simply by single-celled haploid organisms such as the algae of genus \"Chlamydomonas\" or the yeast \"Saccharomyces cerevisiae\". Such organisms exist normally in a haploid state, containing only one set of chromosomes per cell. However, the mechanism remains largely the same among all haploid eukaryotes.\n\nWhen subjected to environmental stress, such as nitrogen starvation in the case of \"Chlamydomonas\", cells are induced to form gametes. Gamete formation in single-celled haploid organisms such as yeast is called sporulation, resulting in many cellular changes that increase resistance to stress. Gamete formation in multicellular fungi occurs in the gametangia, an organ specialized for such a process, usually by meiosis. When opposite mating types meet, they are induced to leave the vegetative cycle and enter the mating cycle. In yeast, there are two mating types, a and α. In fungi, there can be two, four, or even up to 10,000 mating types, depending on the species. Mate recognition in the simplest eukaryotes is achieved through pheromone signaling, which induces shmoo formation (a projection of the cell) and begins the process of microtubule organization and migration. Pheromones used in mating type recognition are often peptides, but sometimes trisporic acid or other molecules, recognized by cellular receptors on the opposite cell. Notably, pheromone signaling is absent in higher fungi such as mushrooms.\n\nThe cell membranes and cytoplasm of these haploid cells then fuse together in a process known as plasmogamy. This results in a single cell with two nuclei, known as pronuclei. The pronuclei then fuse together in a well regulated process known as karyogamy. This creates a diploid cell known as a zygote, or a zygospore, which can then enter meiosis, a process of chromosome duplication, recombination, and cell division, to create four new haploid gamete cells. The advantage of sexual reproduction is the same as in any organism: more genetic variability results, providing the opportunity for adaption through natural selection. Thus, karyogamy is the key step in bringing together a variety of genetic material in order to ensure recombination in meiosis.\n\nThe ultimate goal of karyogamy is fusion of the two haploid nuclei. The first step in this process is the movement of the two pronuclei toward each other, which occurs directly after plasmogamy. Each pronucleus has a spindle pole body that is embedded in the nuclear envelope and serves as an attachment point for microtubules. Microtubules, an important fiber-like component of the cytoskeleton, emerge at the spindle pole body. The attachment point to the spindle pole body marks the minus end, and the plus end extends into the cytoplasm. The plus end has normal roles in mitotic division, but during nuclear congression, the plus ends are redirected. The microtubule plus ends attach to the opposite pronucleus, resulting in the pulling of the two pronuclei toward each other.\n\nMicrotubule movement is mediated by a family of motor proteins known as kinesins, such as Kar3 in yeast. Accessory proteins, such as Spc72 in yeast, act as a glue, connecting the motor protein, spindle pole body and microtubule in a structure known as the half-bridge. Other proteins, such as Kar9 and Bim1 in yeast, attach to the plus end of the microtubules. They are activated by pheromone signals to attach to the shmoo tip. A shmoo is a projection of the cellular membrane which is the site of initial cell fusion in plasmogamy. After plasmogamy, the microtubule plus ends continue to grow towards the opposite pronucleus. It is thought that the growing plus end of the microtubule attaches directly to the motor protein of the opposite pronucleus, triggering a reorganization of the proteins at the half-bridge. The force necessary for migration occurs directly in response to this interaction.\n\nTwo models of nuclear congression have been proposed: the sliding cross-bridge, and the plus end model. In the sliding cross-bridge model, the microtubules run antiparallel to each other for the entire distance between the two pronuclei, forming cross-links to each other, and each attaching to the opposite nucleus at the plus end. This is the favored model. The alternative model proposes that the plus ends contact each other midway between the two pronuclei and only overlap slightly. In either model, it is believed that microtubule shortening occurs at the plus end and requires Kar3p (in yeast), a member of a family of kinesin-like proteins.\n\nMicrotubule organization in the cytoskeleton has been shown to be essential for proper nuclear congression during karyogamy. Defective microtubule organization causes total failure of karyogamy, but does not totally interrupt meiosis and spore production in yeast. The failure occurs because the process of nuclear congression cannot occur without functional microtubules. Thus, the pronuclei do not approach close enough to each other to fuse together, and their genetic material remains separated.\n\nMerging of the nuclear envelopes of the pi occurs in three steps: fusion of the outer membrane, fusion of the inner membrane, and fusion of the spindle pole bodies. In yeast, several members of the Kar family of proteins, as well as a protamine, are required for the fusion of nuclear membranes. The protamine Prm3 is located on the outer surface of each nuclear membrane, and is required for the fusion of the outer membrane. The exact mechanism is not known. Kar5, a kinesin-like protein, is necessary to expand the distance between the outer and inner membranes in a phenomenon known as bridge expansion. Kar8 and Kar2 are thought to be necessary to the fusing of the inner membranes.\nAs described above, the reorganization of accessory and motor proteins during pronuclear migration also serves to orient the spindle pole bodies in the correct direction for efficient nuclear congression. Nuclear congression can still take place without this pre-orientation of spindle pole bodies, but it is slower. Ultimately the two pronuclei combine the contents of their nucleoplasms and form a single envelope around the result.\n\nAlthough fungi are normally haploid, diploid cells can arise by two mechanisms. The first is a failure of the mitotic spindle during regular cell division, and does not involve karyogamy. The resulting cell can only be genetically homozygous since it is produced from one haploid cell. The second mechanism, involving karyogamy of somatic cells, can produce heterozygous diploids if the two nuclei differ in genetic information. The formation of somatic diploids is generally rare, and is thought to occur because of a mutation in the karyogamy repressor gene (KR).\n\nThere are, however, a few fungi that exist mostly in the diploid state. One example is Candida albicans, a fungus that lives in the gastrointestinal tracts of many warm blooded animals, including humans. Although usually innocuous, \"C. albicans\" can turn pathogenic and is a particular problem in immunosuppressed patients. Unlike with most other fungi, diploid cells of different mating types fuse to create tetraploid cells which subsequently return to the diploid state by losing chromosomes.\n\nMammals, including humans, also combine genetic material from two sources - father and mother - in fertilization. This process is similar to karyogamy. As with karyogamy, microtubules play an important part in fertilization and are necessary for the joining of the sperm and egg (oocyte) DNA. Drugs such as griseofulvin that interfere with microtubules prevent the fusion of the sperm and egg pronuclei. The gene KAR2 which plays a large role in karyogamy has a mammalian analog called Bib/GRP78. In both cases, genetic material is combined to create a diploid cell that has greater genetic diversity than either original source. Instead of fusing in the same way as lower eukaryotes do in karyogamy, the sperm nucleus vesiculates and its DNA decondenses. The sperm centriole acts as a microtubule organizing center and forms an aster which extends throughout the egg until contacting the egg's nucleus. The two pronuclei migrate toward each other and then fuse to form a diploid cell.\n\n", "id": "599709", "title": "Karyogamy"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40939889", "text": "Nucleoplasmin\n\nNucleoplasmin, the first identified molecular chaperone is a thermostable acidic protein with a pentameric structure. The protein was first isolated from Xenopus species\n\nThe pentameric protein participates in various significant cellular activities like sperm chromatin remodeling, nucleosome assembly, genome stability, ribosome biogenesis, DNA duplication and transcriptional regulation. During the assembly of regular nucleosomal arrays, these nucleoplasmins transfer the DNA to them by binding to the histones. This reaction requires ATP.\n\n", "id": "40939889", "title": "Nucleoplasmin"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1009199", "text": "Callus (cell biology)\n\nPlant callus (plural \"calluses\" or \"calli\") is a growing mass of unorganized plant parenchyma cells. In living plants, callus cells are those cells that cover a plant wound. In biological research and biotechnology callus formation is induced from plant tissue samples (explants) after surface sterilization and plating onto tissue culture medium in vitro (in a closed culture vessel such as a Petri dish). The culture medium is supplemented with plant growth regulators, such as auxins, cytokinins, and gibberellins, to initiate callus formation or somatic embryogenesis. Callus initiation has been described for all major groups of land plants. \n\nPlant species representing all major land plant groups have been shown to be capable of producing callus in tissue culture. A callus cell culture is usually sustained on gel medium. Callus induction medium consists of agar and a mixture of macronutrients and micronutrients for the given cell type. There are several types of basal salt mixtures used in plant tissue culture, but most notably modified Murashige and Skoog medium, White's medium, and woody plant medium. Vitamins are also provided to enhance growth such as Gamborg B5 vitamins. For plant cells, enrichment with nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium is especially important. Plant callus is usually derived from somatic tissues. The tissues used to initiate callus formation depends on plant species and which tissues are available for explant culture. The cells that give rise to callus and somatic embryos usually undergo rapid division or are partially undifferentiated such as meristematic tissue. In alfalfa, \"Medicago truncatula\", however callus and somatic embryos are derived from mesophyll cells that undergo dedifferentiation. Plant hormones are used to initiate callus growth. \nSpecific auxin to cytokinin ratios in plant tissue culture medium give rise to an unorganized growing and dividing mass of callus cells. Callus cultures are often broadly classified as being either compact or friable. Friable calluses fall apart easily, and can be used to generate cell suspension cultures. Callus can directly undergo direct organogenesis and/or embryogenesis where the cells will form an entirely new plant. This process is known as callus culture\n\nCallus can brown and die during culture, but the causes for callus browning are not well understood. In \"Jatropha curcas\" callus cells, small organized callus cells became disorganized and varied in size after browning occurred. Browning has also been associated with oxidation and phenolic compounds in both explant tissues and explant secretions. In rice, presumably, a condition which is favorable for scutellar callus induction induces necrosis too.\n\nCallus cells are not necessarily genetically homogeneous because a callus is often made from structural tissue, not individual cells. Nevertheless, callus cells are often considered similar enough for standard scientific analysis to be performed as if on a single subject. For example, an experiment may have half a callus undergo a treatment as the experimental group, while the other half undergoes a similar but non-active treatment as the control group.\n\nPlant calluses derived from many different cell types can differentiate into a whole plant, a process called regeneration, through addition of plant hormones to the culture medium. This ability is known as totipotency. Regeneration of a whole plant from a single cell allows transgenics researchers to obtain whole plants which have a copy of the transgene in every cell. Regeneration of a whole plant that has some genetically transformed cells and some untransformed cells yields a chimera. In general, chimeras are not useful for genetic research or agricultural applications.\n\nGenes can be inserted into callus cells using biolistic bombardment, also known as a gene gun, or \"Agrobacterium tumefaciens\". Cells that receive the gene of interest can then be recovered into whole plants using a combination of plant hormones. The whole plants that are recovered can be used to experimentally determine gene function(s), or to enhance crop plant traits for modern agriculture.\n\nCallus is of particular use in micropropagation where it can be used to grow genetically identical copies of plants with desirable characteristics.\n\nHenri-Louis Duhamel du Monceau investigated wound-healing responses in elm trees, and was the first to report formation of callus on live plants.\n\nIn 1908, E. F. Simon was able to induce callus from poplar stems that also produced roots and buds. The first reports of callus induction \"in vitro\" came from three independent researchers in 1939. P. White induced callus derived from tumor-developing procambial tissues of hybrid \"Nicotiana glauca\" that did not require hormone supplementation. Gautheret and Nobecourt were able to maintain callus cultures of carrot using auxin hormone additions.\n\n", "id": "1009199", "title": "Callus (cell biology)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=41288775", "text": "Detention center (cell biology)\n\nA nucleolar detention center (DC) is a region of the cell in which certain proteins are temporarily detained in periods of cellular stress. DCs are absent from cells under normal culture conditions, but form in response to specific environmental triggers, such as low extracellular pH or high temperature, when long noncoding RNAs are induced from regions of intergenic DNA. The detention of numerous proteins in DCs is believed to reduce metabolic activity and promote survival under unfavorable conditions.\nDCs form at the center of nucleoli and therefore disrupt the normal organization of these organelles. The structural remodeling that ensues leaves nucleoli unable to sustain their primary function, ribosomal biogenesis. Therefore, the formation of DCs is thought to convert nucleoli from “ribosome factories” to “prisons for proteins”.\n", "id": "41288775", "title": "Detention center (cell biology)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31931538", "text": "Autophagosome\n\nAn autophagosome is a spherical structure with double layer membranes. It is the key structure in macroautophagy, the intracellular degradation system for cytoplasmic contents (e.g., abnormal intracellular proteins, excess or damaged organelles) and also for invading microorganisms. After formation, autophagosomes deliver cytoplasmic components to the lysosomes. The outer membrane of an autophagosome fuses with a lysosome to form an autolysosome. The lysosome's hydrolases degrade the autophagosome-delivered contents and its inner membrane.\n\nThe formation of autophagosomes is regulated by genes that are well-conserved from yeast to higher eukaryotes. The nomenclature of these genes has differed from paper to paper, but it has been simplified in recent years. The gene families formerly known as APG, AUT, CVT, GSA, PAZ, and PDD are now unified as the ATG (AuTophaGy related) family.\n\nThe size of autophagosomes differs between mammals and yeast. Yeast autophagosomes are about 500-900 nm, while mammalian autophagosomes are larger (500-1500 nm). In some examples of cells, like embryonic stem cells, embryonic fibroblasts, and hepatocytes, autophagosomes are visible with light microscopy and can be seen as ring-shaped structures.\n\nThe initial step of autophagosome formation of an omegasome on the endoplasmic reticulum, followed by of elongation of structures called phagophores.\n\nThe formation of autophagosomes is controlled by Atg genes through Atg12-Atg5 and LC3 complexes. The conjugate of Atg12-Atg5 also interacts with Atg16 to form larger complexes. Modification of Atg5 by Atg12 is essential for the elongation of the initial membrane.\n\nAfter the formation of the spherical structure, the complex of ATG12-ATG5:ATG16L1 dissociates from the autophagosome. LC3 is cleaved by ATG4 protease to generate cytosolic LC3. LC3 cleavage is required for the terminal fusion of an autophagosome with its target membrane. LC3 is commonly used as a marker of autophagosomes in immunocytochemistry, because it is the essential part of the vesicle and stays associated until the last moment before its fusion. At first, autophagosomes fuse with endosomes or endosome-derived vesicles. These structures are then called amphisomes or intermediate autophagic vacuoles. Nonetheless, these structures contain endocytic markers even small lysosomal proteins such as cathepsin D.\n\nThe process is similar in yeast, however the gene names differ. For example, LC3 in mammals is Atg8 in yeast and autophagosomes are generated from Pre-Autophagosomal Structure (PAS) which is distinct from the precursor structures in mammalian cells. The pre-autophagosomal structure in yeast is described as a complex localized near the vacuole. However the significance of this localization is not known. Mature yeast autophagosomes fuse directly with vacuoles or lysosomes and do not form amphisomes as in mammals.\n\nIn yeast autophagosome maturation, there are also other known players as Atg1, Atg13 and Atg17. Atg1 is a kinase upregulated upon induction of autophagy. Atg13 regulates Atg1 and together they form a complex called Atg13:Atg1, which receives signals from the master of nutrient sensing – Tor. Atg1 is also important in late stages of autophagosome formation.\n\nIn neurons, autophagosomes are generated at the neurite tip and mature (acidify) as they travel towards the cell body along the axon. This axonal transport is disrupted if huntingtin or its interacting partner HAP1, which colocalize with autophagosomes in neurons, are depleted.\n", "id": "31931538", "title": "Autophagosome"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42073672", "text": "Neuronal self-avoidance\n\nNeuronal self-avoidance, or isoneural avoidance, is an important property of neurons which consists in the tendency of branches (dendrites and axons) arising from a single soma (also called isoneuronal or sister branches) to turn away from one another. The arrangements of branches within neuronal arbors are established during development and result in minimal crossing or overlap as they spread over a territory, resulting in the typical fasciculated morphology of neurons (Fig 1).\n\nIn opposition, branches from different neurons can overlap freely with one another. This propriety demands that neurons are able to discriminate \"self\", which they avoid, from \"non-self\" branches, with which they coexist. This neuronal self-recognition is attained through families of cell recognition molecules which work as individual barcodes, allowing the discrimination of any other nearby branch as either \"self\" or \"non-self\".\n\nSelf-avoidance ensures that dendritic territories are covered completely and yet non-redundantly guaranteeing that branches achieve functionally appropriate coverage of input or output territories.\n\nNeuronal communication requires the coordinated assembly of axons, dendrites, and synapses. Therefore, self-avoidance is necessary for proper neuronal wiring and postnatal development and, together with neuronal tiling (heteroneuronal avoidance), is a crucial spacing mechanism for patterning neural circuits that results in complete and nonredundant innervation of sensory or synaptic space.\n\nThe concept of neuronal self-avoidance emerged about 40 years ago. The pioneer studies were performed in the leech, focusing on the central nervous system and developing mechanosensory neurons. Leeches from two species: \"Hirudo medicinalis\" and \"Haementeria ghilianii\", remained the main organism for the study of the question of neuronal self-recognition and self-avoidance. In this animal, the repeating segmental pattern of the nervous system along with the fact that neurons are relatively few in number, and many are large enough to be recognized allowed the experimental study of the general problem of neuronal specificity.\nIn 1968, through the mapping of mechanoreceptor axonal receptive fields in \"H. medicilalis\", Nicholls and Baylor revealed distinct types of boundaries between axons from the same or different types of neurons, and also between individual neurons. They observed that receptive fields were subdivided into discrete areas, innervated by the different branches of a single cell. These boundaries, unlike those between adjacent fields of different cells, were abrupt showing nearly no overlap. The authors then suggested a mechanism for the spatial arrangement of axons in which \"\"a fiber might repel other branches more strongly if they arise from the same cell than if they come from a homologue, and not at all if they come from a cell with a different modality\"\".\nIn 1976, Yau confirmed their findings and proposed that the branches of a cell recognized each other, therefore avoiding to grow into the same territory and establishing the discrete areas that Nicholls and Baylor observed. It was then clear that mechanosensory neurons, in leech, show self-avoidance: with the repulsion between branches originating from the same cell, but they did not showed class-avoidance, meaning that branches from the same type of neurons could overlap.\n\nThe phenomena was recognized but a lot remained unknown, including the term \"Self-avoidance\" which arises in 1982/1983 with the studies of Kramer.\nIn 1982, Kramer postulated that isoneuronal axons (axons growing from the same neuron), contrarily to heteroneuronal axons, avoid each other when growing on the same substrate (see Movie).\nThis was further explored, by other authors, the fact that this self-avoidance would require neurites to be able to distinguish between self and non-self, reinforcing the ideas of Yau.\nIn 1983 Kramer and Kuwada propose that this self-recognition of two growing axonal processes might be mediated by their filopodia, which appear to make mutual contacts. This idea was backed up by the studies of Goodman et al. (1982) in insect neurons, which postulated that filopodia played an important role in the recognition and choice of axonal growth pathways.\nThe conservation of the mechanism in invertebrates together with the fact that adult morphology of many neurons appears to satisfy the rule, suggested that non-overlap of isoneuronal processes could be a general phenomenon of neuronal development.\nIn 1985 empirical data was added by Kramer and Stent with the experimentally induced variations in the branching pattern through surgically preventing or delaying the outgrowth of the axon branches. As predicted by the proposal of self-avoidance, interference with the outgrowth of a field axon branch resulted in the spread of the axon branch of the other field into what normally was not a territory. Thus, neuronal self-avoidance does play a significant role in the development of mechanosensory receptive field structure.\n\nIn the late 1980s, the molecular machinery that could be the basis of the phenomena started to be unveiled. Receptors such as cell adhesion molecules of the cadherin and immunoglobulin super families, which mediate interactions between opposing cell surfaces, and integrins acting as receptors for extracellular matrix components were widely expressed on developing neurites.\n\nIn 1990, Macagno et al., integrated the results from several studies, once again emphasizing the evolutionary conservation of the overall phenomena: Leech neurons, like those of other invertebrates and those of vertebrates, undergo specific interactions during development which allow the definition of the adult morphologies and synaptic connections. That morphology reflects the developmental compromise between the potential of the neuron to grow and the constraints placed upon that growth by internal and external factors. Thus, the self-recognizing mechanism would be useful not only to self-avoidance but also as a means of individualization. During development, competition among neurons of the same type for a limited supply required for process growth and maintenance would occur, with one cell gaining space at the expense of others. Inhibitory interactions were also invoked, and this placed the phenomena of self-recognition in the bigger picture of the axon guidance process (link). Together, these studies led to the view that neural circuit assembly emerged as a result of a relatively small number of different signals and their receptors, some acting in a graded fashion and in different combinations.\n\nIn 1991, scientists became aware that self-avoidance was also present in non-neuronal cell types, such as leech comb cells, which might similarly form discrete domains. Later, this was also observed in mammalian astrocytes.\nWang and Macagno, in 1998, again recurring to \"Hirudo medicinalis\" mechanosensory neurons, performed and elegant experiment in order to try to answer the still remaining question: \"How does a cell recognize self and respond by not growing over or along itself?\"\nThe authors then proposed two general types of mechanisms: I) External signals: Sibling neurites display surface identifying molecular factors, unique to each cell, that are capable of homotypic binding and therefore repel sibling neurites, or II) Internal signals: synchronous cell activity, such as voltage, which is transmitted within the cell mediating a dynamic mechanism of sibling growth inhibition.\nContrarily to the first hypothesis, the second would require the continuity and communication between all parts of the cell for self-avoidance to occur.\nSo the experiment consisted of detaching one of the neurons dendrites and see how the remaining attached dendrites reacted towards the detached fragment, \"do they still avoid overlapping?\"\nThe result was that the detached branch would stop being recognized as \"self\" by the other branches of the neuronal, leading to dendrite overlap.\nThe clear conclusion of the study was that continuity between all parts of the neuron is critical for self-avoidance to operate. The authors then suggest various mechanisms that require continuity and could function as recognition signal, and thus might be the responsible ones, such as \"electrical activity, active or passive, as well as the diffusion of cytoplasmic signals either passively or by fast axonal transport\".\nIn the late 1990s and beyond, model organisms started to be used in the studies and the molecular mechanisms of self-avoidance started to be unraveled. In 1999 Wu and Maniatis discovered a striking organization of a large family of human neural protocadherin cell adhesion genes which formed a gene cluster encoding 58 protocadherins. The members of the protocadherin gene cluster were compelling candidates to provide the molecular code required for the maintenance of the self/non-self discrimination that led to self-avoidance. It was later (2012) confirmed, by Lefebvre et al., in a study with amacrine cells and Purkinje cells of \"Mus musculus\", that these proteins are expressed in different combinations in individual neurons, thus providing \"barcodes\" with that distinguish one neuron from another.\n\nIn 2000, Schmucker et al., through cDNA and genomic analyses of \"Drosophila\" dendritic arborization sensory neurons, the existence of multiple forms of \"Down syndrome cell adhesion molecule (Dscam)\" was revealed. The authors saw that alternative splicing could potentially generate more than 38,000 Dscam isoforms and hypothesized that this molecular diversity could contribute to the specificity of neuronal connectivity and thus, self-avoidance.\n\nTogether, the discoveries of the two large families of cell surface proteins encoded by the Dscam1 locus and the clustered protocadherin (Pcdh) loci opened the door to the numerous modern studies. The current studies take great advantage not only of the uprising of the molecular and genomic biology but also from the bioinformatics tools, developed since the 19th century.\n\nSelf-avoidance has been widely discussed amongst scientists and throughout time the experiments were done in several animal models.\nThe first experiments were done in leech. In 1981, Wässle tried to understand how retinal ganglion cells establish their dendritic territories in cats. Processes like dendritic tiling and self-avoidance are extremely important to correct development of neuronal structures, and in this specific case ganglion cells have to cover the retina to guarantee that every point of the visual space is actually \"seen\". He saw that cell bodies are arrayed in regular mosaic, and dendritic fields adapt to the available space. However, this hypothesis was based in mathematical models: Dirichlet model.\n\nPerry and Linden (1982) were the first to present clear evidence of the dendritic \"competition\" in mice retina. Destruction of ganglion cells gives the chance to their neighboring cells to extend their dendritic projections. They proposed competition for synapses as the cause for equilibrium between growth and repulsion of dendrites.\n\nThough mouse and Drosophila are the models currently used to construct a model of self-avoidance for vertebrates and invertebrates respectively, throughout time there are several examples of this phenomenon in other model and non-model species:\n\n\nTrigeminal neurons in head skin exhibit a competitive behavior and only when one of them is completely removed, for example the left trigeminal ganglion, allows the right ganglion neurites to cross midline and innervate left side of the head. The correct innervation is due to repulsive nature of interactions between these movement detector neurites reinforcing all the anterior models of self-avoidance.\n\n\nRetina grows throughout life by addition of new neurons at the margin and death of ganglion neurons in the center. Once again it is proved that each cell senses neighbor cells and can occupy space left by other.\n\n\nTrigeminal neurons, developed 16hrs post fertilization, are part of the peripheral sensory system and detect thermal and mechanical stimuli in the skin. The \"growth-and-repulsion\" model arose from complex topographic restriction of growth cones between trigeminal and Rohon-Beard neurons.\n\n\nDscam mutants exhibit severely disorganized neural network and axon fasciculation.\n\nThe two major structures used in self-avoidance studies are the retinal ganglion cells (RGC) in mice and somatosensory neurons in \"Drosophila\". These structures are pointed as different molecular models because the principal molecule involved in self-avoidance is Dscam in invertebrates and Protocadherins in vertebrates.\n\nCorrect assembly of the components in mice retina is dependent of Dscam/DscamL1 correct expression to form mosaics of different cell type of RGC, soma spacing and dendrite arborization, thus ensuring the coverage of all visual area by each cell type and more specifically to inhibit excessive fasciculation and clumping of cell bodies in photoreceptors, rod bipolar cells (RBCs) and amacrine cells in visual system. The occurrence of correct stratification and connection with synapses tells us that Dscam knockout affects only the repulsive interactions and coverage of the dendritic arbors and functional bindings are maintained.\n\nThe actual main conclusions are based in the identification of different types of retinal neurons, each one with a different coverage factor value revealing graded degrees of homotypic dendritic repulsion. Developmental sequence accepted is 1) define number and spacing of cells, 2) controlled growth of branches and 3) fine-tune of dendritic tiling for maximal coverage of the structure. Experiments with mutant mice for \"Math5\" and \"Brn3b\" (responsible of degeneration of 95% and 80% of retinal ganglion cells, respectively) shows that removal of ganglion cells doesn't decrease the retinal ganglion cell types and that position of these cells isnot defined by dendritic homotypic interactions only, but for some kind of intrinsic genetic program.\n\n\"Drosophila melanogaster\" is the model for experiments in multiple dendritic (MD) neurons which compose the stereotyped pattern of peripheral nervous system. Dendritic arborization neurons are the major subtype of MD neurons group and presents highly branched dendrites underneath the epidermis. Sugimura et al. showed dendritic arborization (da) neurons that stabilize their branches shape in early larval stages and others that continue shaping throughout life cycle.\n\nAs other types of cells involved in processes dependent of self-recognition (like self-avoidance and tiling, See Figure-2) these da neurons can fill the empty spaces left by neighbor cells and this filling-in process is triggered by loss of local isoneural inhibitory contacts.\n\nSince \"Drosophila\" is one of the best studied models in mechanisms of neuronal self-recognition, we can find several results obtained in larval stages. One of the most remarkable examples is the incorrect development of dendritic arbors in the larval eye (Bolwig's organ) due to Dscam knockout mutation.\n\nNumerous models and structures with different development timing and life cycles are used in studies of self-avoidance. Therefore, some conflicts arise when we try to define a strict development phase for the occurrence of these phenomena. The initial idea was that, in some early development point, neural cells contact with each other and organize their distribution, but several studies demonstrated that self-avoidance is also present in adult life.\n\nTo solve this question it would be ideal to monitor dendritic development of neurons from its birth till maturation inside whole-mount animals.\n\nIn \"Drosophila\", studies comprise both larval and adult phases, and number of hours after egg layer is determinant for correct construction of dendritic tiling in sensory neurons. Early in the pupal stage, those neurons prune all their dendrites. Later each neuron grows a completely new dendrite for adult function. While the dendrites are being remodeled, the axons stay largely intact and all these phases will be negatively impacted in case of interference with self-avoidance propriety.\n\nExons of Dscam domains can be differently expressed according to the life cycle phase of the fly. Exon 9 splicing is temporally regulated, with only a few exon 9 sequences contributing to early embryo isoforms and the remaining exon 9 possible sequences become more prevalent with age. These results prove that, independently of the thousands of isoforms that could be generated, the diversity continues to be temporally and spatially controlled.\n\nIn mouse retina the majority of ganglion cells are born at E17 (embryonic stage/day 17). At this age the retina has reached 25% of its mature size\n\nCellular studies of self-avoidance imply that any underlying molecular mechanism must enforce robust and selective contact-dependent cell surface recognition only between sister branches, and must link recognition to changes in growth cone behavior. Recent studies to define the molecular basis of contact-dependent homotypic interactions led to the identification of two large families of cell-surface proteins encoded by the Drosophila Down syndrome cell adhesion molecule 1 (\"Dscam1\") locus and the clustered protocadherin (Pcdh) loci in mammals. These proteins, with diverse extracellular domains, and shared cytoplasmatic presumptive intracellular signaling domains, are able to provide diverse recognition specificities to a vast array of different neurites, endowing neurons with a unique cell-surface identity that allows neurons to distinguish self from non-self.\nAdditional self-surface receptors implicated in self-avoidance include the immunoglobulin superfamily member Turtle, which functions in some \"Drosophila\" da neurons to enforce terminal branch spacing.\n\nSeveral studies have implicated \"Drosophila\" \"Dscam1\" in dendritic and axonal self-avoidance and process spacing in diverse neuronal populations, including mushroom body axons, olfactory projection neuron (PN) dendrites, and dendritic arborization (da) neuron dendrites\nIt is notable that the function of Dscam both invertebrates and invertebrates is context and species-dependent, as the molecule has been shown to regulate repulsion, outgrowth, attraction/ adhesion, and synapse formation in different systems.\n\nDscam1 encodes an immunoglobulin (Ig) superfamily member which, in Drosophila, can generate up to 19,008 proteins with distinct ectodomains. In binding assays, Dscams show isoform-specific homophilic interactions, but little interaction occurs between different, yet closely related, isoforms.\n\nDscam1 mediated self-recognition is essential for self-avoidance between sister neurites\nHughes et al. (2007) reported that Dscam loss-of-function in da neurons caused excessive self-crossing of dendrites from the same neuron. Dscam over-expression forced the respective dendrites to segregate from each other. Based on these data, Dscam results in a lack of self-avoidance of sister dendrites. Therefore, the direct isoform-specific homophilic Dscam-Dscam interactions must result in signal transduction events that lead to repulsion of dendrites expressing identical Dscam isoforms. This conversion of an initial Dscam-dependent cell-surface interaction into a repulsive response that leads to dendrite separation in da neurons is supported by Matthews et al. (2007) in a study that demonstrated that the ectopic expression of identical Dscam isoforms on the dendrites of different cells promoted growth away from each other. The authors also suggest that identical Dscam isoforms expressed in two cell populations \"in vitro\" induced their aggregation in an isoform-specific manner, showing that Dscam provides cells with the ability to distinguish between different cell surfaces.\nMoreover, expression of single Dscam1 molecules lacking most of their cytoplasmic tail prevented ectopic branch segregation and instead led to apparently stable adhesion between dendrites.\nCombined, these results support a simple model for a direct role for Dscam in self-recognition in which identical Dscam ectodomains on the surfaces of isoneuronal dendrites recognize each other and induce a subsequent repulsive signal that is mediated by domains in the cytoplasmic tail (Figure 7).\n\nHomophilic recognition provides the molecular basis for self-avoidance\n\nTo test whether homophilic binding of Dscam1 isoforms is required for self-avoidance, Wu and coworkers generated pairs of chimeric isoforms that bind to each other (heterophilic) but not to themselves (homophilic). These isoforms failed to support self-avoidance. By contrast, co-expression of complementary isoforms within the same neuron restored self-avoidance. These data establish that recognition between Dscam1 isoforms on opposing surfaces of neurites of the same cell provides the molecular basis for self-avoidance.\n\nDiversity of Dscam isoforms in individual neurons is not required for self-avoidance ...\n\nIn 2004, Zhan et al. published a study in which the function of Dscam diversity was explored by assessing the isoforms of Dscam expressed by the developing mushroom body (MB) neurons, as well as the ability of individual isoforms to rescue the Dscam loss-of-function phenotypes and the consequences of ectopic expression of single Dscam isoforms. They demonstrated that different subtypes of MB neurons express different arrays of Dscam isoforms and that loss of Dscam1 in these neurons leads to a failure in branch separation, a phenotype that can be rescued by the expression of single arbitrary isoforms in single neurons.\nAlso, in da neurons, single arbitrarily chosen isoforms rescued the Dscam1 null self-avoidance phenotype. These results lead to the conclusion that Dscam1 diversity is not required in individual neurons for self-avoidance.\n\n... but diversity of Dscam isoforms expressed by neurons of different types is essential for discriminating between self and non-self neurites\n\nTo test whether sister branch segregation requires neighboring mushroom body axons to express different sets of Dscam isoforms, Hattori et al. (2009) reduced the entire repertoire of Dscam ectodomains to just a single isoform using homologous recombination and examined mushroom body morphology in \"Dscam\" and control animals. In the majority of the mushroom bodies analyzed, one of the two lobes was completely absent and in the few remaining samples, one lobe was significantly thinner than the other. This dominant phenotype indicates that the defects do not result from the loss of any one isoform, but rather the presence of the same isoform on all axons.\nThese studies led to the conclusion that each neuron expresses a set of Dscam1 isoforms largely different from their neighbors and that it is crucial for neighboring neurons to express distinct Dscam isoforms, but the specific identity of the isoforms expressed in an individual neuron is unimportant, as long as sister branches express the identical set of isoforms to allow for the homotypic repulsion between them.\n\nThousands of isoforms are required for proper self-recognition\n\nLater on, Hattori et al. (2009) took a genomic replacement strategy to generate mutant animals in which the number of potential Dscam1 isoforms was limited. Their goal was to determine how many isoforms were necessary to ensure that neurites do not inappropriately recognize and avoid non-self-neurites. Branching patterns improved as the potential number of isoforms increased, independently of the identity of the isoforms. In conclusion, the size of isoform pool required for robust discrimination between self and non-self is in the thousands.\n\nIn sum, isoform identity between branches of the same neuron leads to recognition via the extracellular region and repulsion mediated by the intracellular tail of Dscam1. As the Dscam1 isoforms expressed in different da neurons are likely to be different, dendrites of different da neurons do not inappropriately recognize non-self as self. Thus, Dscam1 proteins are required for self-avoidance and provide the molecular code by which neurites discriminate between self-dendrites and those of neighboring cells (Figure 7).\n\nSelf-avoidance has only recently been explored in the vertebrate brain development and mainly in the context of patterning neurites in the Inner plexiform layers (IPLs). In contrast to \"Drosophila\", mouse DSCAMs are typical cell surface molecules, lacking the massive alternative splicing of the fly Dscam1 orthologous undergoes. So although DSCAMs may retain a conserved function in mediating self-avoidance in vertebrates, the absence of molecular diversity makes it clear that they do not play a role in self-recognition.\n\nDscams act to negate cell-type-specific interactions rather than actively promoting repulsion in vertebrates' neurites\n\nConsidering that \"Dscam\" and \"Dscaml1\" have non-overlapping expression patterns in the mouse retina, with \"Dscam\" being expressed in a subset of amacrine cells and most retinal ganglion cells (RGC) and \"Dscaml1\" expressed in the rod circuit, Fuerst et al. (2009) examined retinal ganglion cell populations in \"Dscam\" mice and, in addition, assessed retinal anatomy in the rod circuit using a gene-trap-knockout allele of \"Dscaml1\". In the absence of either gene, the cells that would normally express it showed excessive fasciculation of their dendrites and clumping of their cell bodies. These findings led to the conclusion that \"Dscam\" and \"Dscaml1\" prevent excessive adhesion, primarily by masking cell-type-specific adhesive interactions between dendrites of the same cell class, rather than actively promoting repulsion between them.\nThus, in the absence of diversity, mammalian DSCAMs do not provide cells with the ability to distinguish between their own processes and the processes of all other cells, including processes from cells of the same type. Instead, DSCAM acts to negate cell-type-specific interactions that are promoted by other recognition molecules.\n\nMore recent studies demonstrated that mice use a different family of cell recognition molecules: clustered Protocadherins (Pcdhs), in a fly Dscam1-like strategy to regulate self-avoidance. Although both clustered Pcdhs and Dscam1 genes generate families of proteins with diverse ectodomains joined to a common cytoplasmic domain, the mode of generating clustered Pcdhs and fly Dscam1 counterpart diversity is markedly different. Pcdhs diversity is largely generated by alternative promoter choice, as opposed to alternative splicing.\nThe number of Pcdhs isoforms varies between different vertebrate species, but in aggregate, there are typically on the order of 50 isoforms.\n\nIsoform-specific homophilic recognition\n\nCompelling evidence for discrete binding specificities of different clustered Pcdhs isoforms was uncovered in 2010 by Schreiner & Weiner, who verified that Pcdhs promote isoform-specific homophilic recognition. While the number of Pcdhs isoforms pales in comparison to the number of Dscam1 isoforms, hetero-oligomerization of Pcdhs markedly increases the number of discrete binding specificities encoded by the locus.\nPcdhs are required for self-avoidance\n\nTo seek roles of Pcdh-γs in self-avoidance, Lefebvre et al. (2012) focused on a retinal interneuron, the starburst amacrine cell (SAC), which expresses Pcdh-γs and exhibits dramatic dendritic self-avoidance. They used a Cre-Lox system to delete all the variable domains of the Pcdh-γ locus in the developing retina and verified that dendrites arising from a single SAC frequently crossed each other and sometimes formed loose bundles, similarly to the removal of Dscam1 from da neurons (Figure 8).\n\nPcdhs diversity is essential for self-recognition\n\nFurthermore, Lefebvre and colleagues assessed the requirement for isoform diversity in Pcdh-γ-dependent self-avoidance. They demonstrated that single arbitrarily chosen isoforms rescued self-avoidance defects of Pcdh-γ mutant and that expression of the same isoform in neighboring SACs reduced the overlap between them.\nTheir results indicate that diversity appears to underlie self/non-self discrimination, presumably because neighboring neurons are unlikely to express the same isoforms and are therefore free to interact. Therefore, isoform diversity enables SACs to distinguish isoneuronal from heteroneuronal dendrites. As with \"Dscam1\", self-avoidance in SACs does not rely on a specific isoform, but rather requires that isoform usage differs among neighboring cells.\nThus, two phyla appear to have recruited different molecules to mediate similar, complex strategies for self-recognition, thereby promoting self-avoidance.\n\n", "id": "42073672", "title": "Neuronal self-avoidance"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11225114", "text": "7-Aminoactinomycin D\n\n7-Aminoactinomycin D (7-AAD) is a fluorescent chemical compound with a strong affinity for DNA. It is used as a fluorescent marker for DNA in fluorescence microscopy and flow cytometry. It intercalates in double-stranded DNA, with a high affinity for GC-rich regions, making it useful for chromosome banding studies.\n\nWith an absorption maximum at 546 nm, 7-AAD is efficiently excited using a 543 nm helium–neon laser; it can also be excited with somewhat lower efficiency using a 488 nm or 514 nm argon laser lines. Its emission has a very large Stokes shift with a maximum in the deep red: 647 nm. 7-AAD is therefore compatible with most blue and green fluorophores – and even many red fluorophores – in multicolour applications.\n\n7-AAD does not readily pass through intact cell membranes; if it is to be used as a stain for imaging DNA fluorescence, the cell membrane must be permeabilized or disrupted. This method can be used in combination with formaldehyde fixation of samples.\n\n7-AAD is also used as a cell viability stain. Cells with compromised membranes will stain with 7-AAD, while live cells with intact cell membranes will remain dark.\n\nThe related compound actinomycin D is nonfluorescent, but binds DNA in the same way as 7-AAD. Its absorbance changes when bound to DNA, and it can be used as a stain in conventional transmission microscopy.\n\n", "id": "11225114", "title": "7-Aminoactinomycin D"}
