{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50979026", "text": "Hot container composting\n\nHot container composting (also referred to as in-vessel composting for larger industrial batches) is different to cold composting, in that compost is created without losing valuable heat. Heat loss is the reason why a compost pile takes so long to decompose. Observers have noted that the time taken to create compost can be dramatically reduced by retaining the heat in a suitably insulated container. Another observation noted is the way the compostable items are added and mixed which allows for aeration. This is an important step in the process. Compost becomes anaerobic due to the absence of air, and this can result in it becoming smelly. By adding large, medium and fine items to the top of the container, space is provided in between the items for the air to flow from bottom to top. This creates a trickle ventilation. Compost made with this method is called aerobic composting (no smell).\n\n\nPlace the waste you want to compost in a bucket or bag, add large pieces (bones, large bark pieces or anything the size of large egg), medium pieces (carrot tops, potato skins, chopped up branches etc.) and fine pieces (grass cuttings, ground egg shells) and carbon (bag of shredded paper, cut up cardboard, torn up cereal boxes, egg cartons, old magazines, newspaper).\n\nMix well or shake the bag. Empty the bag into top of container and close the lid. It must be able to be sealed and not let air enter or escape. Only the top vent should allow a controlled flow of steam to escape. Too much and most of the beneficial heat will escape and too little and the steam turns to streams of water in the inside and drops the internal temperature which in turn lowers the rate of decomposition.\n\nThe hyperthermic bacteria present in the container, derived from the handful of garden soil you added, reproduces and multiplies very quickly, which gives off a lot of heat.\n\nRetaining this heat is the secret to hot container composting. By keeping the container sealed, insulated and controlling the escaping steam, the temperature can be kept with the range needed for hot container composting. Temperatures higher than 70 degrees causes the important hyperthermic bacteria to die off and defeats the plan.\n\nThe smaller the pieces, the quicker the decomposition. Typing paper takes days to decompose, grass clippings take weeks, branches a couple of months, and bark takes several months.\n\nHot container composters aim for a temperature range of between 100 degrees Fahrenheit (43 degrees Celsius) and 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius) to aid optimal bacterial decomposition. A suitable thermometer, analogue or digital, is needed for monitoring this.\n\nIf you don't have a thermometer, you have to wait for the final product to inspect if it is suitable.\n\nThe bottom door is only opened to extract the compost when the top is full. The first time you open the door, there will be partially decomposed material.\n\nThis is due to the most of the decomposition work taking place on the top of the pile (where the heat is concentrated) and this can simply be added to the top during your next top up. Your next collection will probably have been through the process and be ready for use.\n\nLet the collected material stand for aeration for 30 minutes to let the bad odor dissipate. Either remove the larger and medium-sized particles by hand or use a sifter. The larger pieces can be used again.\n\nThere are advantages and disadvantages of cold and hot composting.\n\n\n\n", "id": "50979026", "title": "Hot container composting"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18287344", "text": "Degrowth\n\nDegrowth () is a political, economic, and social movement based on ecological economics, anti-consumerist and anti-capitalist ideas. It is also considered an essential economic strategy responding to the limits-to-growth dilemma (see \"The Path to Degrowth in Overdeveloped Countries\" and post-growth). Degrowth thinkers and activists advocate for the downscaling of production and consumption—the contraction of economies—arguing that overconsumption lies at the root of long term environmental issues and social inequalities. Key to the concept of degrowth is that reducing consumption does not require individual martyring or a decrease in well-being. Rather, \"degrowthists\" aim to maximize happiness and well-being through non-consumptive means—sharing work, consuming less, while devoting more time to art, music, family, nature, culture and community.\n\nThe movement arose from concerns over the perceived\nconsequences of the productivism and consumerism\nassociated with industrial societies (whether\ncapitalist or socialist) including:\n\nAs economies grow, the need for resources grows accordingly. There is a fixed supply of non-renewable resources, such as petroleum (oil), and these resources will inevitably be depleted. Renewable resources can also be depleted if extracted at unsustainable rates over extended periods. For example, this has occurred with 'caviar' production in the Caspian Sea. There is much concern as to how growing demand for these resources will be met as supplies decrease. Many organizations and governments look to energy technologies such as biofuels, solar cells, and wind turbines to meet the demand gap after peak oil. Others have argued that none of the alternatives could effectively replace versatility and portability of oil. Authors of the book \"Techno-Fix\" criticize technological optimists for overlooking the limitations of technology in solving agricultural and social challenges arising from growth.\n\nProponents of degrowth argue that decreasing demand is the only way of permanently closing the demand gap. For renewable resources, demand, and therefore production, must also be brought down to levels that prevent depletion and are environmentally healthy. Moving toward a society that is not dependent on oil is seen as essential to avoiding societal collapse when non-renewable resources are depleted. \"But degrowth is not just a quantitative question of doing less of the same, it is also and, more fundamentally, about a paradigmatic re-ordering of values, in particular the (re)affirmation of social and ecological values and a (re)politicisation of the economy\".\n\nThe ecological footprint is a measure of human demand on \nthe Earth's ecosystems. It compares human demand with \nplanet Earth's ecological capacity to regenerate. It \nrepresents the amount of biologically productive land and \nsea area needed to regenerate the resources a human \npopulation consumes and to absorb and render harmless the \ncorresponding waste. \nAccording to a 2005 Global Footprint Network report, inhabitants of \nhigh-income countries live off of 6.4 global hectares \n(gHa), while those from low-income countries live off of a \nsingle gHa. For example, while each inhabitant of \nBangladesh lives off of what they produce from 0.56 \ngHa, a North American requires 12.5 gHa. Each \ninhabitant of North America uses 22.3 times as much land \nas a Bangladeshi. According to the same report, the \naverage number of global hectares per person was 2.1, \nwhile current consumption levels have reached 2.7 hectares \nper person. \nIn order for the world's population to attain the living \nstandards typical of European countries, the resources of \nbetween three and eight planet Earths would be \nrequired. In order for \nworld economic equality to be achieved with the current \navailable resources, rich countries would have to reduce \ntheir standard of living through degrowth. The eventual reduction of all \navailable resources would lead to a forced reduction in \nconsumption. Controlled reduction of consumption would \nreduce the trauma of this change assuming no technological changes increase the planet's carrying capacity.\n\nDegrowth thought is in opposition to all forms of productivism (the belief that economic productivity and growth is the purpose of human organization). It is, thus, opposed to the current form of sustainable development. While the concern for \nsustainability does not contradict degrowth, sustainable development is rooted in mainstream development ideas that aim to increase capitalist growth and consumption. Degrowth therefore sees sustainable development as an oxymoron, as any development based on growth in a finite and environmentally stressed world is seen as inherently unsustainable. \nCritics of degrowth argue that a slowing of economic growth would result in increased unemployment, increase poverty and decrease income per capita. Many who understand the devastating environmental consequences of growth still advocate for economic growth in the South, even if not in the North. But, a slowing of economic growth would fail to deliver the benefits of degrowth—self-sufficiency, material responsibility—and would indeed lead to decreased \nemployment. Rather, degrowth proponents advocate for a complete abandonment of the current (growth) economic system, suggesting that relocalizing and abandoning the global economy in the Global South would allow people of the South to become more self-sufficient and would end the overconsumption and exploitation of Southern resources by the North.\n\nTechnologies designed to reduce resource use and improve efficiency are often touted as sustainable or green solutions. Degrowth literature, however, warns about these technological advances due to the \"rebound effect\". This concept is based on observations that when a less resource-exhaustive technology is introduced, behaviour surrounding the use of that technology may change, and consumption of that technology could increase or even offset any potential resource savings. In light of the rebound effect, proponents of degrowth hold that the only effective 'sustainable' solutions must involve a complete rejection of the growth paradigm and a move toward a degrowth paradigm. There are also fundamental limits to technological solutions in the pursuit of degrowth, as all engagements with technology increase the cumulutive matter-energy throughput. However, the convergence of digital commons of knowledge and design with distributed manufacturing technologies may arguably hold potential for building degrowth future scenarios \n\nThe contemporary degrowth movement can trace its roots back to the anti-industrialist trends of the 19th century, developed in Great Britain by John Ruskin, William Morris and the Arts and Crafts Movement (1819–1900), in the United States by Henry David Thoreau (1817–1862), and in Russia by Leo Tolstoy (1828–1910).\n\nThe concept of \"degrowth\" proper appeared during the 1970s, proposed by André Gorz (1972) and intellectuals such as Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen, Jean Baudrillard, Edward Goldsmith and Ivan Illich, whose ideas reflect those of earlier thinkers, such as the economist E. J. Mishan, the industrial historian Tom Rolt, and the radical socialist Tony Turner. The writings of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi and J. C. Kumarappa also contain similar philosophies, particularly regarding his support of voluntary simplicity.\n\nMore generally, degrowth movements draw on the values of humanism, enlightenment, anthropology and human rights.\n\nIn 1968, the Club of Rome, a think tank headquartered in Winterthur, Switzerland, asked researchers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology for a report on practical solutions to problems of global concern. The report, called \"The Limits to Growth\", published in 1972, became the first important study that indicated the ecological perils of the unprecedented economic growth the world was experiencing at the time.\n\nThe reports (also known as the Meadows Reports) are not strictly the founding texts of the degrowth movement, as these reports only advise zero growth, and have also been used to support the sustainable development movement. Still, they are considered the first official studies explicitly presenting economic growth as a key reason for the increase in global environmental problems such as pollution, shortage of raw materials, and the destruction of ecosystems. A second report was published in 1974, and together with the first, drew considerable attention to the topic.\n\nThe degrowth movement recognises Romanian American mathematician, statistician and economist Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen as the main intellectual figure inspiring the movement. In his magnum opus on \"The Entropy Law and the Economic Process\", Georgescu-Roegen argues that economic scarcity is rooted in physical reality; that all natural resources are irreversibly degraded when put to use in economic activity; that the carrying capacity of Earth—that is, Earth's capacity to sustain human populations and consumption levels—is bound to decrease sometime in the future as Earth's finite stock of mineral resources is presently being extracted and put to use; and consequently, that the world economy as a whole is heading towards an inevitable future collapse.\n\nGeorgescu-Roegen's intellectual inspiration to degrowth goes back to the 1970s. When Georgescu-Roegen delivered a lecture at the University of Geneva in 1974, he made a lasting impression on the young and newly graduated French historian and philosopher , who had earlier been introduced to Georgescu-Roegen's magnum opus by an academic advisor. Georgescu-Roegen and Grinevald soon made friends, and Grinevald started devoting his research to a closer study of Georgescu-Roegen's work. As a result, in 1979 Grinevald published a French translation of a selection of Georgescu-Roegen's articles entitled \"Demain la décroissance: Entropie – Écologie – Économie\" ('Tomorrow, the Decline: Entropy – Ecology – Economy'). Georgescu-Roegen, who spoke French fluently, personally approved the use of the term \"décroissance\" in the title of the French translation. The book gained influence in French intellectual and academic circles from the outset. Later, the book was expanded and republished in 1995, and once again in 2006; however, the word \"Demain\" ('Tomorrow') was removed from the title of the book in these second and third editions. \n\nBy the time Grinevald suggested the term \"décroissance\" to form part of the title of the French translation of Georgescu-Roegen's work, this term had already disseminated through French intellectual circles since the early 1970s to signify a deliberate political action to downscale the economy on a permanent and voluntary basis. Simultaneously, but independently hereof, Georgescu-Roegen had criticised the ideas of The Limits to Growth and Herman Daly's steady-state economy in his pointed and polemical article on \"Energy and Economic Myths\", delivered as a series of lectures from 1972 and onwards at various places, but not published in print before 1975. In this article, Georgescu-Roegen stated the following view:\n\nWhen reading this particular passage of the text, Grinevald realised that no professional economist of any orientation had ever reasoned like this before. Grinevald also realised the striking conceptual resemblance between Georgescu-Roegen's viewpoint and the French debates progressing by the time; this resemblance then transformed into the title of the French edition. Taken together, the translation of Georgescu-Roegen's work into French \"both\" fed on \"and\" gave further impetus to the concept of \"décroissance\" in the country—and everywhere else in the francophone world—thereby creating something of an intellectual feedback loop. \n\nBy the 2000s, when \"décroissance\" was to be translated from French and back into English as the catchy banner for the new social movement, the original term 'decline' was now deemed inappropriate and misdirected for the purpose: 'Decline' usually refers to an unexpected, unwelcome and temporary economic recession, something bad to be avoided or quickly overcome. Instead, the neologism 'degrowth' was coined to signify a deliberate political action to downscale the economy on a permanent and voluntary basis—as in the prevailing French usage of the term—something good to be welcomed and maintained, or so followers believe. \n\nWhen the first international degrowth conference of its kind was held in Paris in 2008, the participants bestowed a generous amount of credit and appreciation on Georgescu-Roegen and his work. Further, in his manifesto on \"Petit traité de la décroissance sereine\" ('Farewell to Growth'), leading French champion of the degrowth movement Serge Latouche has credited Georgescu-Roegen as 'a main theoretical source of degrowth.' Likewise, Italian degrowth theorist Mauro Bonaiuti has considered Georgescu-Roegen's work to be 'one of the analytical cornerstones of the degrowth perspective.'\n\nSerge Latouche, a professor of economics at the Paris-Sud 11 University, has noted that:\n\nE. F. Schumacher's 1973 book \"Small is Beautiful\" predates a unified degrowth movement, but nonetheless serves as an important basis for degrowth ideas. In this book he critiques the neo-liberal model of economic development, arguing that an increasing \"standard of living\", based on consumption, is absurd as a goal of economic activity and development. Instead, under what he refers to as Buddhist economics, we should aim to maximize well-being while minimizing consumption.\n\nIn January 1972 Edward Goldsmith and Robert Prescott-Allen—editors of \"The Ecologist\" journal—published \"A Blueprint for Survival\", which called for a radical programme of decentralisation and deindustrialisation to prevent what the authors referred to as \"\"the breakdown of society and the irreversible disruption of the life-support systems on this planet\"\".\n\nThe movement has also included international conferences, promoted by the network Research&Degrowth (R&D), in Paris (2008), Barcelona (2010), Montreal Venice (both 2012), Leipzig (2014) and Budapest (2016).\n\nThe First International Conference on Economic Degrowth for Ecological Sustainability and Social Equity of Paris (2008) was a discussion about the financial, social, cultural, demographic, environmental crisis caused by the deficiencies of capitalism and an explanation of the main principles of the degrowth. The Second International Conference of Barcelona on the other hand focused on specific ways to implement a degrowth society.\n\nConcrete proposals have been developed for future political actions, including:\n\nIn spite of the real willingness of reform and the development of numerous solutions, the conference of Barcelona didn’t have a big influence on the world economic and political system. Many critiques have been made concerning the proposals, mostly about the financial aspects, and this has refrained changes to occur.\n\nAlthough not explicitly called Degrowth, movements using similar concepts and terminologies can be found around the world, such as Buen Vivir in Latin America or Eco-Swaraj in India.\n\nThe degrowth movement has a variety of relations to other social movements and alternative economic visions, which range from collaboration to partial overlap. The Konzeptwerk Neue Ökonomie (Laboratory for New Economic Ideas), which hosted the 2014 international Degrowth conference in Leipzig, has published a project entitled “Degrowth in movement(s)” in 2017, which maps relationships with 32 other social movements and initiatives.\n\nMarxists distinguish between two types of growth: that which is useful to mankind, and that which simply exists to increase profits for companies. Marxists consider that it is the nature and control of production that is the determinant, and not the quantity. They believe that control and a strategy for growth are the pillars that enable social and economic development. According to Jean Zin, while the justification for degrowth is valid, it is not a solution to the problem.\nHowever, other Marxist writers have adopted positions close to the de-growth perspective. For example, John Bellamy Foster and Fred Magdoff, in common with David Harvey, Immanuel Wallerstein, Paul Sweezy and others focus on endless capital accumulation as the basic principle and goal of capitalism. This is the source of economic growth and, in the view of these writers, is unsustainable. Foster and Magdoff develop Marx's own concept of the metabolic rift, something he noted in the exhaustion of soils by capitalist systems of food production, though this is not unique to capitalist systems of food production as seen in the Aral Sea.\n\nIn stressing the negative rather than the positive side(s) of growth, the majority of degrowth proponents remains focused on (de-)growth, thus co-performing and further sustaining the actually criticised unsustainable growth obsession. One way out of this paradox might be in changing the reductionist vision of growth as ultimately economic concept, which proponents of both growth and degrowth commonly imply, for a broader concept of growth that allows for the observation of growth in other function systems of society. A corresponding recoding of growth-obsessed or capitalist organisations has recently been proposed.\n\n", "id": "18287344", "title": "Degrowth"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=156286", "text": "Social ecology\n\nSocial ecology is a critical social theory founded by American anarchist and libertarian socialist author Murray Bookchin. Conceptualized as a critique of current social, political, and anti-ecological trends, it espouses a reconstructive, ecological, communitarian, and ethical approach to society. This version advocates a reconstructive and transformative outlook on social and environmental issues, and promotes a directly democratic, confederal politics. As a body of ideas, social ecology envisions a moral economy that moves beyond scarcity and hierarchy, toward a world that reharmonizes human communities with the natural world, while celebrating diversity, creativity and freedom. Bookchin suggests that the roots of current ecological and social problems can be traced to hierarchical modes of social organization. Social ecologists claim that the systemic issue of hierarchy cannot be resisted by individual actions alone such as ethical consumerism but must be addressed by more nuanced ethical thinking and collective activity grounded in radically democratic ideals. The complexity of relationships between people and nature is emphasized, along with the importance of establishing more mutualistic social structures that take account of this.\n\nSocial ecology's social component comes from its position that nearly all of the world's ecological problems stem from social problems; with these social problems in turn arising from structures and relationships of dominating hierarchy. They argue that apart from those produced by natural catastrophes, the most serious ecological dislocations of the 20th and 21st centuries have as their cause economic, ethnic, cultural, and gender conflicts, among many others. Present ecological problems, social ecologists maintain, cannot be clearly understood, much less resolved, without resolutely dealing with problems within society.\n\nSocial ecology is associated with the ideas and works of Murray Bookchin, who had written on such matters from the 1950s until his death, and, from the 1960s, had combined these issues with revolutionary social anarchism. His works include \"Post-Scarcity Anarchism\" (1971), \"Toward an Ecological Society\" (1980), and \"The Ecology of Freedom\" (1982).\n\nSocial ecology locates the roots of the ecological crisis firmly in relations of hierarchy and domination between people. In the framework of social ecology, \"the very notion of the domination of nature by man stems from the very real domination of human by human.\" While the domination of nature is seen as a product of domination within society, this domination only reaches crisis proportions under capitalism. In the words of Bookchin:\n\nWhile identifying himself within the anarchist tradition for most of his career, beginning in 1995, Bookchin became increasingly critical of anarchism, and in 1999 took a decisive stand against anarchist ideology. He had come to recognize social ecology as a genuinely new form of libertarian socialism, and positioned its politics firmly in the framework of a political ideology which he called Communalism.\n\n\n\n", "id": "156286", "title": "Social ecology"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52197659", "text": "Permutational analysis of variance\n\nPermutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA), is a non-parametric multivariate statistical test. PERMANOVA is used to compare groups of objects and test the null hypothesis that the centroids and dispersion of the groups as defined by measure space are equivalent for all groups. A rejection of the null hypothesis means that either the centroid and/or the spread of the objects is different between the groups. Hence the test is based on the prior calculation of the distance between any two objects included to the experiment.\nPERMANOVA shares some resemblance to ANOVA where they both measure the sum-of-squares within and between group and make use of F test to compare within-group to between-group variance. However, while ANOVA bases the significance of the result on assumption of normality, PERMANOVA draws tests for significance by comparing the actual F test result to that gained from random permutations of the objects between the groups. Moreover, whilst PERMANOVA tests for similarity based on a chosen distance measure, ANOVA tests for similarity of the group averages.\n\nIn the simple case of a single factor with \"p\" groups and \"n\" objects in each group,the total sum-of-squares is determined as:\n\nwhere \"N\" is the total number of objects, and formula_2 is the squared distance between objects \"i\" and \"j\".\n\nSimilarly, the within groups sum-of-squares is determined:\n\nwhere formula_4 takes the value of 1 if observation \"i\" and observation \"j\" are in the same group, otherwise it takes the value of zero.\nThen, the between groups sum-of-squares can be calculated as the difference between the overall and the within groups sum-of-squares:\n\nFinally, a pseudo F-statistic is calculated:\n\nwhere \"p\" is the number of groups.\n\nFinally, the PERMANOVA procedure draws significance for the actual F statistic by performing multiple permutations of the data. In each such the items are shuffled between groups. For each such permutation of the data the permutation f-statistic is calculated. The p-value is then calculated by:\n\nWhere formula_8 is the F statistic of gained from the actual data and formula_9 is a permutation p-value.\n\nPERMANOVA is widely used in the field of ecology and is implemented in several software packages including PERMANOVA software, PRIMER and R Vegan package.\n", "id": "52197659", "title": "Permutational analysis of variance"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14719160", "text": "Primer-E Primer\n\nPlymouth Routines In Multivariate Ecological Research (PRIMER) is a statistical package that is a collection of specialist univariate, multivariate, and graphical routines for analyzing species sampling data for community ecology. Types of data analyzed are typically species abundance, biomass, presence/absence, and percent area cover, among others. It is primarily used in the scientific community for ecological and environmental studies.\n\nMultivariate routines include:\n\nRoutines can be resource intensive due to their non-parametric and permutation-based nature. Programmed in the VB.Net environment.\n\n", "id": "14719160", "title": "Primer-E Primer"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25790152", "text": "Ecological triage\n\nEcological triage refers to the decision-making of environmental conservation using the concepts of medical triage. In medicine, the allocation of resources in an urgent situation is prioritized for those with the greatest need and those who would receive the greatest benefit. Similarly, the two parameters of ecological triage are the level of threat and the probability of recovery. Because there are limitations to resources such as time, money, and manpower, it is important to prioritize specific efforts and distribute resources efficiently. Ecological triage differentiates between areas with an attainable emergent need, those who would benefit from preventative measures, and those that are beyond repair.\n\nEcological triage is not simple, dichotomous decision making. It involves an array of complex factors including assumptions, mathematical calculations, and planning for uncertainties. When assessing an ecosystem, there are a myriad of factors conservationists consider, but there are also variables which they are unable to account for. Conservationists and scientists often have incomplete understanding of population dynamics, impacts of external threats, and efficacy of different conservation tactics. It is important to incorporate these unknowns when assessing a population or ecosystem. By following the principles of triage, we are able to allow for the efficient allocation of resources as conservationists continue to develop the best options for ecological preservation and restoration.\n\nDue to the multitude of variables within a population or ecosystem, it is important to address the unknown factors which may not initially be accounted for. Many ecologists utilize the Info-gap decision theory, which focuses on strategies that are most likely to succeed despite uncertainties. This process is composed of three main elements:\n\n\nSome critics of environmental triage believe the process chooses \"winners\" and \"losers\" and therefore abandons certain demographics. Other criticism argues that ecological triage allows for the government to justify under-funding environmental programs. By utilizing a formal decision-making model, the government can deem certain projects as a lost cause and choose to withhold funding. Critics and supporters alike stress the necessity of expanding the environmental budget to provide the best conservation and restoration efforts.\n", "id": "25790152", "title": "Ecological triage"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8461948", "text": "Ecosystem approach\n\nThe ecosystem approach is a conceptual framework for resolving ecosystem issues. The idea is to protect and manage the environment through the use of scientific reasoning. Another point of the ecosystem approach is preserving the Earth and its inhabitants from potential harm or permanent damage to the planet itself. With the preservation and management of the planet through an ecosystem approach, the future monetary and planetary gain are the by-product of sustaining and/or increasing the capacity of that particular environment. This is possible as the ecosystem approach incorporates humans, the economy, and ecology to the solution of any given problem. The initial idea for an ecosystem approach would come to light during the second meeting (November 1995) at the Conference of the Parties (COP) it was the central topic in implementation and framework for the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), it would further elaborate on the ecosystem approach as using varies methodologies for solving complex issues.\n\nThroughout, the use and incorporation of ecosystem approaches, two similar terms have been created in that time: ecosystem-based management and ecosystem management. The Convention on Biological Diversity has seen ecosystem-based management as a supporting topic/concept for the ecosystem approach. Similarly, ecosystem management has a minor difference with the two terms. Conceptual the differences between the three terms come from a framework structure and the different methods used in solving complex issues. The key component and definition between the three terms refer to the concept of conservation and protection of the ecosystem.\n\nThe use of the ecosystem approach has been incorporated with managing water, land, and living organisms ecosystems and advocating the nourishment and sustainment of those ecological space. Since the ecosystem approach is a conceptual model for solving problems, the key idea could combat various problems.\n\nOn December 29, 1993, the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) was signed and applied as a multilateral treaty. With the purpose of achieving: \n\nTwo years after the CBD was signed, during the second meeting of the Conference of the Parties (November 1995) the representatives of the signed treaty would agree upon employing a strategy to combat the intricate and actively changing ecosystem. The ecosystem approach would represent as the equalizer for obtaining knowledge and creating countermeasures in preventing the endangerment of any ecological environment.\nWith the acknowledgment of the ecosystem approach, during the fifth meeting of the Conference of the Parties, a group consensus agreed on a concrete definition and elaboration for the ecosystem approach would be needed, and the Parties would request Subsidiary Body on Scientific Technical and Technological Advice (SBSTTA) to create a guideline with 12 principles and a description of the ecosystem approach. The final results are given at COP 5 Decision V/6 summary.\n\nDuring the seventh meeting of the Conference of the Parties, further iteration on the ecosystem approach would be seen as a priority, during the meeting the parties would agree new implementation and strategical development could be incorporated with the ecosystem approach into the CBD. Furthermore, creating a new relationship with sustaining forest organization and the ecosystem approach was talked about. All topics and discussion regarding seventh meeting are given at COP 7 Decision Vll/11 summary.\n\nWith the development and use of the ecosystem approach, different variation to that form have been created and used. The two being ecosystem management and ecosystem-based management, the framework of the three methods are still the same (the conservation and protection of the ecosystem). The distinguishing part beings with how to initiate the approach of solving the problem. Ecosystem-based management (EBM) is used for projects that incorporate interaction of different levels: organisms, the ecosystem, and the human component; however, its varies from the other methods as the scale of the problem is larger and intricate. The objectives should be straightforward and condensed with important systematic information. Also, EBM considers social and cultural aspects into the solution not just only scientific reasoning. With ecosystem management, the process is similar to EBM; however, factors such as socioeconomics and politics can impact the decision and solution. A cultural aspect is also considered when creating a solution.\n\nThe ecosystem approach is currently being used in the fields of environmental and ocean management (i.e. the ecosystem approach does not stop there; it is being used in various fields and sub-fields as well). The goal is to address the current problems facing those fields through the use of conceptual thinking and approach that would determine a viable and sustaining solution. One example, in particular, would be pertaining to Fishery (a commercial industry in capturing and selling of fishes). In recent years, inland fisheries have quintupled from 2 million metric tons to 11 million metric tons in the span of 60 years from 1950 to 2010. Through the use of the ecosystem approach more specifically the ecosystem approach to fisheries (EAF), sometimes referred to as Ecosystem-based fisheries. EAF is seen as a framework to creating local strategies for each specific fishery ecosystem and implementing the new strategies gradually with the already existing rules and regulation. With the use of EAF if successful fishery industries could generate substantial income; as well as, improve the fragile ecosystem of aquarium species.\n\n", "id": "8461948", "title": "Ecosystem approach"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52634071", "text": "Nature Based Solutions\n\nNature-based solutions (NBS) generally refer to the sustainable management and use of nature for tackling societal challenges such as climate change, water security, food security, human health, and disaster risk management. For instance, the protection of mangroves in coastal areas can limit risks of coastal erosion associated to extreme weather conditions, while providing nurseries for fish production to feed local people and sequestering CO. Similarly greening roofs or walls can be used to cool down city areas during summer, to capture storm water, to abate pollution, and to increase human well-being while enhancing biodiversity and connecting the city with the wider ecosystem. With NBS, healthy, resilient and diverse ecosystems (either ‘natural’, managed or newly created) are viewed as providing solutions for the benefit of our societies and overall biodiversity, in the face of global change. The term NBS was put forward by practitioners in the late 2000s (in particular the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and the World Bank) and quickly thereafter by policymakers in Europe (most notably the European Commission). While the term itself is still being framed, case studies from around the world exemplify its potential, as well as the added-value with respect to existing terms and concepts and in complementing traditional conservation approaches. As a consequence, NBS are on their way to being mainstreamed in national and international policies and programmes (e.g. climate change policy, law, infrastructure investment and financing mechanisms).\n\nSocieties increasingly face challenges such as climate change, urbanization, jeopardized food security and water resource provision, and disaster risk. One approach to answer these challenges is to singularly rely on technological strategies. An alternative approach is to manage the (socio-)ecological systems in a comprehensive way in order to sustain and potentially increase the delivery of ecosystem services to humans. In this context, nature-based solutions (NBS) have recently been put forward by practitioners and quickly thereafter by policymakers, referring to the sustainable use of nature in solving coupled environmental-social-economic challenges. While ecosystem services are often valued in terms of immediate benefits to human well-being and economy, NbS focus on the benefits to people and the environment itself, to allow for sustainable solutions that are able to respond to environmental change and hazards in the long-term. NbS go beyond the traditional biodiversity conservation and management principles by \"re-focusing\" the debate on humans and specifically integrating societal factors such as human well-being and poverty reduction, socio-economic development, and governance principles. In this sense, NBS are strongly connected to ideas such as natural systems agriculture, natural solutions, ecosystem-based approaches, adaptation services, natural infrastructure, green infrastructure and ecological engineering. For instance, ecosystem-based approaches are increasingly promoted for climate change adaptation and mitigation by organisations like United Nations Environment Programme and non-governmental organisations such as The Nature Conservancy. These organisations refer to \"policies and measures that take into account the role of ecosystem services in reducing the vulnerability of society to climate change, in a multi-sectoral and multi-scale approach\". Likewise, natural infrastructure is defined as a \"strategically planned and managed network of natural lands, such as forests and wetlands, working landscapes, and other open spaces that conserves or enhances ecosystem values and functions and provides associated benefits to human populations\"; and green infrastructure refers to an \"interconnected network of green spaces that conserves natural systems and provides assorted benefits to human populations\". Similarly, the concept of ecological engineering generally refers to \"protecting, restoring (i.e. ecosystem restoration) or modifying ecological systems to increase the quantity, quality and sustainability of particular services they provide, or to build new ecological systems that provide services that would otherwise be provided through more conventional engineering, based on non-renewable resources\". Given the range of different (existing) approaches that NBS seem to cover, IUCN proposes NBS as an umbrella concept (Table 1; Figure 1).\n\nfig 1 link\nTable 1. Categories and examples of NBS approaches according to IUCN \nThe term \"nature-based solutions\" was first used in the late 2000s in the context of finding new solutions to mitigate and adapt to climate change effects, whilst simultaneously protecting biodiversity and improving sustainable livelihoods. The IUCN referred to NBS in a position paper for the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. The term was also adopted by European policymakers, in particular by the European Commission in a report stressing that NBS can offer innovative means to create jobs and growth as part of a green economy.\n\nWhereas the general objective of NBS is clear, namely the sustainable management and use of nature for tackling societal challenges, Eggermont et al. (2015) clearly showed that different stakeholders view NBS from other perspectives. For instance, IUCN defines NbS as \"actions to protect, sustainably manage and restore natural or modified ecosystems, which address societal challenges effectively and adaptively, while simultaneously providing human well-being and biodiversity benefits\". This framing puts the need for well-managed and restored ecosystems at the heart of NbS, with the overall goal \"to support the achievement of society's development goals and safeguard human well-being in ways that reflect cultural and societal values and enhance the resilience of ecosystems, their capacity for renewal and the provision of services\". In the context of the ongoing political debate on jobs and growth (main drivers of the current EU policy agenda), the European Commission underlines that NBS can transform environmental and societal challenges into innovation opportunities, by turning natural capital into a source for green growth and sustainable development. In their view, NBS to societal challenges are \"solutions that are inspired and supported by nature, which are cost-effective, simultaneously provide environmental, social and economic benefits and help build resilience. Such solutions bring more, and more diverse, nature and natural features and processes into cities, landscapes and seascapes, through locally adapted, resource-efficient and systemic interventions.\" This framing is somewhat broader, and puts economy and social assets at the heart of NBS as importantly as sustaining environmental conditions. It shares similarities with the definition proposed by Maes and Jacobs (2015) defining NBS as \"any transition to a use of ES with decreased input of non-renewable natural capital and increased investment in renewable natural processes\". In their view, development and evaluation of NBS spans three basic requirements: (1) decrease of fossil fuel input per produced unit; (2) lowering of systemic trade-offs and increasing synergies between ES; and (3) increasing labor input and jobs. Here, nature is seen as a tool to inspire more systemic solutions to societal problems.\n\nTable 2: Differing view points in the two major NbS definitions (IUCN, and EC ), with main differences in bold text\nWhatever definition used, promoting sustainability and the increased role of natural, self-sustained processes relying on biodiversity, are inherent to NBS. They constitute actions easily seen as positive for a wide range of stakeholders, as they bring about benefits at environmental, economic and social levels. As a consequence, the concept of NBS is gaining acceptance outside the conservation community (e.g. urban planning) and is now on its way to be mainstreamed into policies and programmes (climate change policy, law, infrastructure investment and financing mechanisms).\n\nIn 2015, the European network BiodivERsA mobilized a range of scientists, research donors and stakeholders and proposed a typology characterizing NbS along two gradients. 1. \"how much engineering of biodiversity and ecosystems is involved in NBS\", and 2. \"how many ecosystem services and stakeholder groups are targeted by a given NBS\". The typology highlights that NBS can involve very different actions on ecosystems (from protection to management and even creation of new ecosystems) and is based on the assumption that the higher the number of services and stakeholder groups targeted, the lower the capacity to maximize the delivery of each service and simultaneously fulfil the specific needs of all stakeholder groups. As such, three types of NBS are distinguished (Figure 2):\n\nType 1 NBS consists of no or minimal intervention in ecosystems, with the objectives of maintaining or improving the delivery of a range of ES both inside and outside of these conserved ecosystems. Examples include the protection of mangroves in coastal areas to limit risks associated to extreme weather conditions and provide benefits and opportunities to local populations; and the establishment of marine protected areas to conserve biodiversity within these areas while exporting biomass into fishing grounds. This type of NBS is connected to, for example, the concept of biosphere reserves which incorporates core protected areas for nature conservation and buffer zones and transition areas where people live and work in a sustainable way.\n\nType 2 NBS corresponds to the definition and implementation of management approaches that develop sustainable and multifunctional ecosystems and landscapes (extensively or intensively managed), which improves the delivery of selected ES compared to what would be obtained with a more conventional intervention. Examples include innovative planning of agricultural landscapes to increase their multi-functionality; and approaches for enhancing tree species and genetic diversity to increase forest resilience to extreme events. This type of NBS is strongly connected to concepts like natural systems agriculture, agro-ecology, and evolutionary-orientated forestry \n\nType 3 NBS consists of managing ecosystems in very extensive ways or even creating new ecosystems (e.g., artificial ecosystems with new assemblages of organisms for green roofs and walls to mitigate city warming and clean polluted air). Type 3 is linked to concepts like green and blue infrastructures and objectives like restoration of heavily degraded or polluted areas and greening cities.\n\nType 1 and 2 would typically fall within the IUCN NBS framework, whereas Type 2 and moreover Type 3 are often exemplified by EC for turning natural capital into a source for green growth and sustainable development.\n\nHybrid solutions exist along this gradient both in space and time. For instance, at landscape scale, mixing protected and managed areas could be needed to fulfil multi-functionality and sustainability goals. Similarly, a constructed wetland can be developed as a type 3 but, when well established, may subsequently be preserved and surveyed as a type 1.\n\nDemonstrating the benefits of nature and healthy ecosystems and showcasing the return on investment they can offer is necessary in order to increase awareness, but also to provide support and guidance on how to implement NBS. A large number of initiatives around the world already highlight the effectiveness of NBS approaches to address a wide range of societal challenges (Table 3)\n\nTable 3: Case studies from around the world\n\nThere is currently no accepted basis on which a government agency, municipality or private company can systematically assess the efficiency, effectiveness and sustainability of a particular nature-based solution. However, a series of principles are proposed to guide effective and appropriate implementation, and thus to upscale NBS in practice. These include, but are not restricted to:\n\nImplementing NBS requires political, economic, and scientific challenges to be tackled. First and foremost, private sector investment is needed, not to replace but to supplement traditional sources of capital such as public funding or philanthropy. The challenge is therefore to provide a robust evidence base for the contribution of nature to economic growth and jobs, and to demonstrate the economic viability of these solutions – compared to technological ones - on a timescale compatible with that of global change. Furthermore, it requires measures like adaptation of economic subsidy schemes, and the creation of opportunities for conservation finance, to name a few. Indeed, such measures will be needed to scale up NBS interventions, and strengthen their impact in mitigating the world's most pressing challenges.\n\nSince 2016, the EU is supporting a multi-stakeholder dialogue platform (called ThinkNature) to promote the co-design, testing and deployment of improved and innovative NBS in an integrated way and at multiple scales and levels (from European to national, regional and local). Creation of such science-policy-business-society interfaces could promote the market uptake of NBS. The project is part of the EU’s Horizon 2020 – Research and Innovation programme, and will last for 3 years. There are a total of 17 international partners involved, including the Technical University of Crete (Project Leader), the University of Helsinki and BiodivERsA.\n\nIn 2017, as part of the Presidency of the Estonian Republic of the Council of the European Union, a flagship conference “Nature-based Solutions: From Innovation to Common-use” is organized by the Ministry of the Environment of Estonia and the University of Tallinn. The NBS 2017 EU conference aims to strengthen synergies among various recent initiatives and programs related to NBS launched by the European Commission and by the EU Member States, focusing on policy and governance of NBS, and on research and innovation. Discussions will cover policy and financing as well as innovative solutions close to or already on the market.\n\n", "id": "52634071", "title": "Nature Based Solutions"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2938915", "text": "Functional group (ecology)\n\nA functional group is merely a set of species, or collection of organisms, that share alike characteristics within a community. Ideally, the lifeforms would perform equivalent tasks based on domain forces, rather than a common ancestor or evolutionary relationship. This could potentially lead to analogous structures that overrule the possibility of homology. More specifically, these beings produce resembling effects to external factors of an inhabiting system. Due to the fact that a majority of these creatures share an ecological niche, it is practical to assume they require similar structures in order to achieve the greatest amount of fitness. This refers to such as the ability to successfully reproduce to create offspring, and furthermore sustain life by avoiding alike predators and sharing meals.\n\nRather than the idea of this concept based upon a set of theories, functional groups are directly observed and determined by research specialists. It is important that this information is witnessed first-hand in order to state as usable evidence. Behavior and overall contribution to others are common key points to look for. Individuals use the corresponding perceived traits to further link genetic profiles to one another. Although, the life-forms themselves are different, variables based upon overall function and performance are interchangeable. These groups share an indistinguishable part within their energy flow, providing a key position within food chains and relationships within environment(s).\n\nWhat is an ecosystem and why is that important? An ecosystem is the biological organization that defines and expands on various environment factors- abiotic and biotic, that relate to simultaneous interaction. Whether it be a producer or relative consumer, each and every piece of life maintains a critical position in the ongoing survival rates of its own surroundings. As it pertains, a functional groups shares a very specific role within any given ecosystem and the process of cycling vitality.\n\nThere are generally two types of functional groups that range between flora and specific animal populations. Groups that relate to vegetation science, or flora, are known as plant functional types. Also referred to as PFT for short, those of such often share identical photosynthetic processes and require comparable nutrients. As an example, plants that undergo photosynthesis share an identical purpose in producing chemical energy for others. In contrast, those within the animal science range are called guilds, typically sharing feeding types. This could be easily simplified when viewing trophic levels. Examples include primary consumers, secondary consumers, tertiary consumers, and quaternary consumers.\n", "id": "2938915", "title": "Functional group (ecology)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15112447", "text": "Trophobiosis\n\nTrophobiosis is a symbiotic association between organisms where food is obtained or provided. The provider of food in the association is referred to as a trophobiont. The name is derived from the Greek τροφή \"trophē\", meaning \"nourishment\" and -βίωσις \"-biosis\" which is short for the English symbiosis.\n\nAmong the more noted trophobiotic groups are ants and members of a number of hemipteran families. A number of ant genera are recorded as tending groups of hemipterans to varying degrees. In most cases the ants collect and transport the honeydew secretions from the hemipterans back to the nest for consumption. Not all examples of ant trophobiotic interactions are mutualistic, with instances such as ants attracted to \"Cacopsylla pyricola\" feeding on both the honeydew and the \"C. pyricola\" individuals. This interaction has been recorded in Ancient Chinese writings and is noted as one of the oldest instances of biological pest control.\n\nIn mutualistic relationships, the production of honeydew by trophobionts is rewarded by removal of dead hemipterans and protection from a variety of predators by the attendant ants. In some relationships the ants will build shelters for the farmed trophobionts, either to protect them or keep them from leaving the area. Some species of ants construct underground rooms to house the trophobionts and carry them between the host plant and housing area daily. In more complex obligate relationships (where both symbionts entirely depend on each other for survival) the ants will nest with the partner trophobionts in silk constructed leaf shelters or in underground colonies. Several species of migratory ants are noted to bring the trophobiont species with them when they move, transporting the trophobionts to new feeding areas and acting as a quick escape method if danger arises. While aphids, mealybugs and other more sedentary hemipterans are most often used as trophobionts, occasional instances of more active hemipterans such as leafhoppers have been recorded. In such instances in southern Africa, larger ant genera such as \"Camponotus\" are more successful at herding and containment of the leafhoppers. Smaller ant genera have been observed to tend younger or smaller leafhoppers for short periods, and in some cases, small ant genera were observed visiting herds tended by large ant genera. In these cases it is suggested the small ant genera may have been stealing honeydew droplets from the herd.\n\nAnts of the entirely subterranean genus \"Acropyga\" have a noted trophobiotic relationship with mealybugs, being considered obligate coccidophiles and living in the same nests with their trophobionts. Queens of at least eleven living \"Acropyga\" species have been observed carrying a \"seed\" trophobiont in their mandibles during the mating flight, and it is suggested the seed is then used to start the mealybug colony in the queen's new nest. The level of dependency between \"Acrophyga\" and their trophobiont is suggested to be such that neither can survive without the other. An experiment using a captive colony of \"A. epedana\" showed that even when the colony was starved the ant refused offered food alternatives.\n\nThis specific behavior has also been documented in Dominican amber fossils dating back , with queens of the fossil species \"Acropyga glaesaria\" being found preserved with species of the extinct mealybug genus \"Electromyrmococcus\". Older trophobiotic associations have been suggested for the Eocene fossil ant species \"Ctenobethylus goepperti\" based on a Baltic amber fossil entombing thirteen \"C. goepperti\" workers intermingled with a number of aphids. \nConvergent behavior to that of \"Acropyga\" is displayed by the arboreal ant \"Tetraponera binghami\". This species lives in hollow internodes of giant bamboos and new queens will also carry a seed mealybug during the mating flight.\n", "id": "15112447", "title": "Trophobiosis"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52833015", "text": "Heliophyte\n\nSunstroke plants or heliophytes are adapted to a habitat with a very intensive insolation, because of the construction of its own structure and maintenance (metabolism). Solar plants, for example, are mullein, ling, thyme and soft velcro, white clover, and most roses. They are common in open terrain, rocks, meadows, as well as at the mountain pastures and grasslands and other long sunny exposures.\n\nSpecial features of the plant include coarse tiny leaves with hairy and waxy protection against excessive light radiation and water loss. In structure, the leaves vary in frequent double palisade layers. Chloroplasts have a protective element such as carotenoid and the enzymes, and accumulation of ROS to avoid toxic effects. In addition, there are also stoma tal apparatus on the leaves and green shoots, in order to allow a better exchange of gases. At same time, this increases possibilities for photosynthesis.\n\nUnlike the shadow-preferring plants, heliophytes have a high light compensation point, and for this they need a higher illumination intensity for effective adoption of carbon dioxide. Sunstroke leaves, in this respect, has a very high capacity, to\n<br>formula_1.\n\nHowever, they have a higher basal metabolism comparing to the other leaves.\n\n", "id": "52833015", "title": "Heliophyte"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52921789", "text": "Land consumption\n\nLand consumption as part of human resource consumption is the conversion of land with healthy soil and intact habitats into areas for industrial agriculture, traffic (road building) and especially urban human settlements. More formally, the EEA has identifid 3 land consuming activities:\nIn all of those respects, land consumption is equivalent to typical land use in industrialized regions and civilizations.\n\nSince often aforementioned conversion activities are virtually irreversible, the term land loss is also used. From 1990 to 2000, of open space were consumed in the U.S.. In Germany, land is being consumed at a rate of more than every day (~ per 10 years). In European Union, land take is estimated approximately about to 1.2 million hectares in 21 EU countries over the period 1990-2006. \n\nLand loss can also happen due to natural factors, like erosion or desertification - nevertheless most of those can also eventually be tracked back to human activities. Another slightly different interpretation of the term is the forced displacement or compulsory acquisition of a native people or settlers from their original land due to land grabbing, etc.. Again, in most cases, this will be due to economic reasons like search for profitable investment and commodification of natural resources.\n\nEven though global land loss progresses at an alarming rate, the land footprint, the area required by some Western countries can a lot larger than the land actually used or even available in the country itself.\n\nWhile land prices have surged in the first few years of the 21st century, land consumption economy still lacks environmental full-cost accounting to add the long-term costs of environmental degradation.\n\nThe major effects of land conversion for economic growth are:\n\n", "id": "52921789", "title": "Land consumption"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5347418", "text": "Rocky shore\n\nA rocky shore is an intertidal area of seacoasts where solid rock predominates. Rocky shores are biologically rich environments, and are a useful \"natural laboratory\" for studying intertidal ecology and other biological processes. Due to their high accessibility, they have been well studied for a long time and their species are well known.\n\nThere are a large number of factors that favour the survival of life on rocky shores. Temperate coastal waters are mixed by waves and convection, maintaining adequate availability of nutrients. Also, the sea brings plankton and broken organic matter in with each tide. The high availability of light (due to low depths) and nutrient levels means that primary productivity of seaweeds and algae can be very high. Human actions can also benefit rocky shores due to nutrient runoff.\n\nDespite these favourable factors, there are also a number of challenges to marine organisms associated with the rocky shore ecosystem. Generally, the distribution of benthic species is limited by salinity, wave exposure, temperature, desiccation and general stress. The constant threat of desiccation during exposure at low tide can result in dehydration. Hence, many species have developed adaptations to prevent this drying out, such as the production of mucous layers and shells. Many species use shells and holdfasts to provide stability against strong wave actions. There are also a variety of other challenges such as temperature fluctuations due to tidal flow (resulting in exposure), changes in salinity and various ranges of illumination. Other threats include predation from birds and other marine organisms, as well as the effects of pollution.\n\nThe Ballantine Scale is a biologically defined scale for measuring the degree of exposure level of wave action on a rocky shore. Devised in 1961 by W. J. Ballantine, then at the zoology department of Queen Mary College, London, U.K., the scale is based on the observation that where shoreline species are concerned \"Different species growing on rocky shores require different degrees of protection from certain aspects of the physical environment, of which wave action is often the most important.\" The species present in the littoral zone therefore indicate the degree of the shore's exposure. The scale runs from (1) an \"extremely exposed\" shore, to (8) an \"extremely sheltered\" shore.\n\nTidal movements of water creates zonation patterns along rocky shores from high to low-tide. The area above the high-tide mark is the supralittoral zone which is virtually a terrestrial environment. The area around the high-tide mark is known as the intertidal fringe. Between the high and low-tide marks is the intertidal or littoral zone. Below the low-tide mark is the sublittoral or subtidal zone.\nThe presence and abundance of different animals and algae vary in different zones along the rocky shore due to differing adaptations to the varying levels of exposure to sun and desiccation along the rocky shore.\n\nRocky shores are exposed to many forms of pollution, in particular pollution related to oil spills. Prominent spills are the Torrey Canyon spill, The Amoco Cadiz spill outside the Brittany coast in France and the Exxon Valdez spill in Prince William Sound, Alaska, USA. Garbage such as plastics and metals being left behind by people is also a problem among many rocky coastlines that attract tourists.\n\n\n", "id": "5347418", "title": "Rocky shore"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51094881", "text": "Solar Alternatives and Associated Programmes\n\nSolar Alternatives and Associated Programmes (SAAP) is a nonprofit organization in the Indian state of Bihar that produces solar devices, to save trees and to provide a dependable energy supply. Founded in 1996 by Jesuit Fr. M.M. Mathew, SAAP uses the “solar bridge” technology developed in Germany by Wolfgang Scheffler. SAAP has filled orders for various applications of this technology in eighteen states across India.\n\nFr. M.M. Mathew, S.J., developed an interest in solar energy while working with the student forum on the environment Tarumitra (\"Friends of Trees\"). He went on to Gujarat in early 1996 to study renewable energy under Wolfgang Scheffler, the inventor of the solar concentrated Scheffler community cooker. Mathew then, with the support of the Patna Jesuits, founded a solar manufacturing unit at St. Mary's church compound in Patna. The Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources (MNES) approved this venture for use countrywide, and engineers from Germany and Switzerland assisted. \n\nA vocational training program affiliated with the National Institute of Open Schooling was also set up. Among its initiatives the school trains around 15 students a year free of cost, half from the USA and UK, in using solar energy. It also provides local peoples consutation and advice at no charge. \n\nIn 2014 SAAP hosted a group of students from the University of Dayton in the USA who focused on solar panels that ran refrigerators in clinics in rural areas, where loss of power causes vaccines to be ruined by the heat. These strudents from Dayton took what they learned back to the States and produced a solar-powered refrigerator that won the American Society of Civil Engineers 2016 award for the best sustainable engineering design by a student team.\n\nThe range of products produced by SAAP, mainly with Scheffler reflectors, include solar electricity, cookers, hot water, steam for turbines, and refrigerators. \"Solar Mathew\", as he is popularly known, also produces at his training and production facility heat storage devices and multipurpose windmills. SAAP has installed four solar tunnel dryers in the North-East for various local self-help groups to preserve and export chillies and ginger throughout the year. The research and development wing of SAAP has developed a prototype solar-powered cycle rickshaw. SAAP has also developed a solar crematorium which saves on trees and is a cheaper option for the poor. For much of this SAAP is the sole fabricator in Bihar state.\n\nTripolia Social Service Hospital, a private charitable hospital in Patna, is one institution that has been totally outfitted by SAAP solar technology, to sterilise medical equipment, sanitise the hospital’s laundry, heat water for baths and medicines, light outdoor pathways at night, and power a residential building and office. The solar dishes track the movement of the sun.\n\n \n", "id": "51094881", "title": "Solar Alternatives and Associated Programmes"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40008648", "text": "Tarumitra\n\nTarumitra is a nationwide students' organization to promote ecological sensitivity in India. It has been campaigning for sensitizing various sections of society on ecological issues. It was started in 1988 by students in Patna, India. U.N has conferred a Special Consultative Status to Tarumitra from 2005. It has over 2,00,000 members in over 1000 high schools and colleges. Tarumitra has also had several full-time volunteers from abroad.\n\nTaru Mitra has also set up a bio-reserve in Patna in a plot of land given to them by the Patna Jesuits. It has a rare collection of over 400 vanishing trees and plants of North India. The Centre has a large genetic nursery, a Tissue Culture lab and facilities to accommodate 50-100 students for nature related camps.\n\nTarumitra, meaning \"Friends of Trees\" in Hindi and Sanskrit, is a student movement to protect and promote a healthy environment on Earth. It was the effort of Jesuit Fr. Robert Athickal from St. Xavier's School, Patna and students from few schools under the leadership of Anindo Banerjee, a class IX student from Loyola High School, Patna, that the movement came into existence in 1988. In April 1989, four high school students from Loyla High School, Anindo Banerjee, Vijay Mathur, Sanjay Pandey and Jayant Chatterjee, set out on a cycle rally in North India from Patna to New Delhi to promote awareness about the environment and the movement. They met with the then vice president of India, Shankar Dayal Sharma, to present their findings. While returning, at Agra, Jayant fell seriously ill and despite attempt, could not be saved. His demise shocked the movement; however, his sacrifice for the environment made his companions to work and promote the movement with great zeal. Today, Jayant's sacrifice is one of the cornerstone of Tarumitra's foundation history, which is still remembered the same way as 24 years ago.\n\nInvigorated by the spirit of the late Jayant Chatterjee, Tarumitra grew up with assistance from Sr. Gita SND, Principal of Hartmann High School, Fr. George Manimala S.J., the then Principal of St. Xavier's High School, Patna and Bro. Geo Pulickal, his assistant, who went out of their way to establish the organisation's firm footing. Kumar Hemant Sinha, a student of 1990 batch of St. Xavier's High School, Patna was chosen its first President. Through their efforts, the present headquarters of the movement, Tarumitra Ashram, was inaugurated by the Collector of Patna, Arvind Prasad, on 20 February 1991. In 1994, the St Xavier’s School gave Tarumitra a 10-acre plot for a plantation at Digha, Patna.\n\nThe strength of Tarumitra also increased rapidly. The girls of the local Hartmann High School, under the leadership of Sr. Gita SND and Sr. Roshni SND, gave the initial fillip needed for any new organisation. Units after units of Tarumitra sprung up in various schools in and around Patna. Many college students, social activists and journalists have also joined Tarumitra in its crusade against the destruction of the environment of India.\n\nThe activists of Tarumitra has taken out massive rallies, organized protest demonstrations, resisted the felling of trees and forests, built road side gardens, cleaned up garbage dumps, planted rare variety of trees, taken house-to-house awareness schemes to name a few. Tarumitra has developed several garbage dumps into beautiful roadside gardens called 'Oxygen Belt' . Each garden is maintained by School or a plant nursery. Tarumitra maintained a total of 38 Oxygen belts at one point in time. Working with a Swiss Physist Wolfgong Scheffler, Tarumitra activist M.M Mathew SJ has helped to set up a plant to fabricate solar cookers along the traditional solar panels to harness solar energy. The activists has taken our processions for bannining the use of plastics.\n\nTarumitra has expanded from the city of Patna to the remote areas of the country. It has joined hands with similar organizations to support the cause. One of the significant steps has been to set up Bio-reserves like the one in Patna in other parts of the country. As of now similar initiatives are coming up in Gujarat, Meghalaya, Tamilnadu, Karnataka and Kerala. Tarumitra also takes part in International summits on environment.\n\nTarumitra received Special Consultative Status (ECOSOC) from the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations from 2005. The organization has supported the participation of hundreds of students in the activities of the United Nations. Many have participated in the U.N Meetings and conferences across the globe.\n", "id": "40008648", "title": "Tarumitra"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51100996", "text": "Workers Development Union\n\nWorkers Development Union (\"Shramik Abhivrudhi Sangh\") is the social action wing of the Goa Jesuits, with activities concentrated in Belgaum and other districts of north Karnataka and in the Kolhapur district of Maharashtra. SAS works among the masses to transform unjust structures of society and to build harmonious communities of diverse peoples, religions, languages, and cultures, helping them to satisfy their basic human needs.\nTwo Jesuits and forty social activists along with many part-time animators facilitate the programs listed below, sharing with the poor their struggles, joys, and hopes. This also join in critical reflection and action on the socio-political and economic situation.\n\nPictures depicting these works are given on each of the SAS pages cited.\n\n \n", "id": "51100996", "title": "Workers Development Union"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51375106", "text": "St. Xavier's Social Service Society\n\nSt. Xavier's Social Service Society (SXSSS), a Jesuit social work originating at St. Xavier's High School Loyola Hall, Ahmedabad, has since 1976 worked to improve the lot of the people in the slums of Ahmedabad city in the areas of education, health, environment, and community organization. Its efforts have also spread to the countryside and more widely. It has taken a leading role among NGOs and has been signalized with awards for its efforts.\n\nTo facilitate the building of people's organizations, enabling them to address their own problems and to make their own interventions for improving their economic, educational, health, and environmental situation; to work toward communal and interreligious harmony; to empower people's organizations at all levels through networking, documentation, and advocacy.\n\nSt. Xavier's Social Service Society (SXSSS) grew out of a 1960s outreach program of students and faculty at St. Xavier's High School Loyola Hall, Ahmedabad. Over the years three areas have come to the fore: education, organizing people's groups, and people's action to improve the quality of their lives. Thus its motto: \"To help people to help themselves.\"\n\nIn 1973, in the wake of the floods in the Sabarmati River which destroyed several hutments and left thousands homeless, Jesuit Fr. Erviti brought together a team of young architects who built Sankalitnagar on the outskirts of the city of Ahmedabad, a model of low-cost housing for people of diverse faiths.\n\nIn 1976, Fr. Erviti, S.J., founded St. Xavier's Social Service Society (SXSSS) beginning with rehabilitation work in Sankalitnagar. In 1983 it moved on to Mahajan-no-Vando and the Nagori Kabrasthan slum settlements. It also obtained its own premises apart from St. Xavier School. In 1986 Erviti died but other Jesuits carried on the leadership. The SXSSS Center for Orientation, Research, and Documentation (CORD) was founded in 1989. It documents and publicizes events that impact people's lives and serves as a nodal point among NGOs and government offices, while coordinating action. It is located near the educational institutions of Ahmedabad and makes available its library, training hall, conference room, seminar hall, and discussion halls to further its purpose.\n\nThe National Institute of Open Schooling (NIOS) is a programme of the Indian Ministry of Human Resource Development. In 1990 SXSSS became the first accredited institute in this programme in Gujarat, with English and Hindi as a medium of instruction. SXSSS also responds to emergency situations – cyclones, floods, droughts, earthquakes, and communal riots that have ravaged life in Gujarat. \"In India in 1991, social and religious tensions in the shantytowns of Ahmedabad were erupting into violence with increased frequency. Saint Xavier's Social Service Society launched a program of peace initiatives such as street plays, festivals, and community meetings that served to counter propaganda and diffuse confrontations.\" By 1994 the Society was active in seven major slum pockets, and had increasing manpower and resources. Funds for its food for work program come from several foreign countries. Since SXSSS is not run by Hindi or Muslims, it is seen as speaking to racial issues from a neutral perspective. Also, it has Sikhs, Jains, Hindi, and Muslims on its staff. In 1995, the organization was named the first recipient of the Anubhai Chimanlal Nagarikta Puraskar for its sustained contribution to the city of Ahmedabad.\n\nIn memory of the fiftieth anniversary of the death of Mahatma Gandhi, SXSSS launched SHANTI (Peace) in Ahmedabad where Gandhi founded his famous Sabarmati Ashram, and where clashes between the Hindus and Muslims have persisted. SHANTI strives to impact people's attitudes at the grassroots level and publishes reports on its efforts and experiences. In December 2004, Jamat-e-Islam-e-Hind presented its Human Rights Award to St. Xavier's Social Service Society for unflinching service towards the cause of communal unity and human rights in the year 2002.\n\nSt. Xavier's Social Service Society continues its close ties with the Jesuit schools in Ahmedabad. In 2007 the Loyola Evening School (LES) was inaugurated as a joint venture of SXSSS and St. Xavier's High School Loyola Hall. It offers children from the slums an opportunity for study and recreation. By the 2010s SXSSS was working in 30 slum pockets of 10 municipal wards in the city of Ahmedabad, while continuing its organizational and advocacy work on a wider scale.\n\nFurther programs initiated by SXSSS or in which it is active include: INNovative Education (INNED), Child Labour Education Centre, Promoting Higher Education (PHE), Social Awareness and Action Program (SAAP), Child to Child Educational Programme, Child Leadership Programme. Gramin Education Programme, Vocational Training Centre, Child Labour Educational Centre, Community Health Improvement Program, Critical Illness Eradication Program, Organizing for Empowerment as with Ahmedabad Shehri Jansangathan, Organizing Women as with Naari Swaman, Youth Empowering Society, and Organizing Occupational Groups, SXSSS has been especially active in health issues and in maternal health.\n\nEvery year St. Xavier's Social Service Society celebrates \"Lokotsav\" in the memory of its founder Fr. Erviti, with a host of festive and informative programs that attract thousands of people. In 2014 Lokotsav built on the theme of International Women's Day.\n\nTo make people aware of their right to food and as a forum for people to speak out regarding corruption in government which impedes people from getting benefits of various government schemes, SXSSS arranged a public hearing in co-ordination with other NGOs and a new forum was formed: Anna Surakhsha Rights Platform.\n\nThe Society's main efforts in environmentalism have been by stimulating the solar cooker movement and by educating for the preservation of forests. SXSSS has been recognized for its environmental efforts by being one of only two Christian NGOs in India invited to the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro in 1992.\n\n\"Perspective – Drashtikon\" is a quarterly magazine produced by SXSSS in Gujarati since 2009. It relates experiences of the urban poor along with expert analysis.\n\nSt. Xavier's Social Service Society brings people together in various ways, including workshops, in the course of its work. A few examples follow.\n\nIn 2000 the Society cosponsored a seminar on multi-cultural democracy in India, attended by over a hundred activists and intellectuals.\n\n\"Reconciliation in Post-Godhra Gujarat – A journey Towards Peace\" is the contribution of SXSSS toward the book \"People Building Peace\". The article focuses on the formation and development of the Jalampuri ni Chali Peace Committee in which SXSSS was instrumental during the communal riots in Gujarat in 2002.\n\nIn 2007 a poster competition for children was held on International Day of Peace and an exhibition followed which drew a large response, as detailed in the booklet \"Perspective of Children on Peace.\"\n\nIn 2008 a workshop on peace was held, including area representatives. Then in 2009 a high level workshop on peace was held during which the booklet \"Shanti ane Astitva\" (Peace and Existence) was released. It narrates peace building efforts of various groups including SXSSS.\n\nAt its CORD facility, SXSSS maintains a library of newspapers in English and Gujarati, 750 magazines, journals and newsletters, and a holding of more than 8000 books, 388 video cassettes, and 330 audio cassettes, along with slides, posters, and charts. It also serves as a publishing house for leaflets, booklets, magazines, books, and reports.\n\nPublications by CORD:\n\nSXSSS is accredited to the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), the UN Inter-Governmental Negotiating Committee for a Convention to Combat Desertification (INCD), and the International Conference on Population and Development (ICPD), and has an open invitation to UN conferences in which NGOs have a place. It is also a Council Member of the Global Environment Facility (GEF) and a member of the Global Health and Environment Library Network (GELNET) of the World Health Organization (WHO). SXSSS also works closely on several issues with the national and state governments and with the Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation (AMC).\n\nThis besides many linkages through the Jesuit connection including Jesuits in Social Action (JESA), the Social Action Sector of the Society of Jesus in South Asia. The Gujarat Jesuit Province runs, besides SXSSS, the following social action centres: Ashadeep Human Development Centre, Vallabh Vidyanagar; Navsarjan Trust, Surat; Prashant, Ahmedabad; Rajpipla Social Service Society, Rajpipla; SANGATH, Modasa; SHAKTI - Legal Aid and Human Rights Centre (LAHRC), Songadh; St. Xavier's Non Formal Education Society (Behavioural Science Centre [BSC]), Ahmedabad; Nayay Darshan (Vadodara). The multifaceted works of these centres are summarized on the SXSSS website.\n\nSXSSS was honored by the Gujarat Minister of Health who, on behalf of the Government of Gujarat Health and Family Welfare Department, Gujarat Cancer and Research Institute, presented a certificate of honor for its contribution to health care and especially for its de-addiction campaign and awareness programs, on 31 May 2007, World Anti Tobacco day.\n\nIn 2008 the Communal Harmony Award was given to an SXSSS children's home monitor (balmitras) Mrs. Niruben Marwadi by the NRI Coalition, for saving Muslim families during the Gujarat Carnage in 2002.\n\nFr. Cedric Prakash, S.J., was director of SXSSS in 1998 when SHANTI was founded and has been the recipient of numerous national and international awards.\n\n\n \n", "id": "51375106", "title": "St. Xavier's Social Service Society"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52923006", "text": "Indian Social Institute, Bangalore\n\nIndian Social Institute, Bangalore, has been an extension service of the Jesuits in Pune, New Delhi, India, since the 1950s, working for social change in the interests of poor and undeserved peoples. In 1993 it became an independent NGO and took its current name.\n\nIn 1951, Jesuit Fr. Jerome D'Souza, an educator and member of the Indian Constituent Assembly, founded the Indian Institute of Social Order in Pune, India, to contribute to the emergence of a new social order in post-independence India. The quarterly journal \"Social Action\" was launched in 1951 and regional training centres were established in various parts of the country, including Bangalore.\n\nIn 1963 the Institute in Pune moved to New Delhi and in 1967 became Indian Social Institute. Extension services increased especially in the southern states around Bangalore, giving assistance to the cooperative movement and offering consultancy services for development agencies, among other programs. Trainees spent up to three months learning the process of social analysis and skills for social mobilization. Numerous action groups emerged, trained at ISI-B, such as the fisherman's movement in Kerala.\n\nSince the 1980s the Documentation Centre of Indian Social Institute functioned out of Bangalore furnishing documentation for activists throughout India. By 1993 the need was realized to make the Indian Social Institute in Bangalore a separate NGO.\n\nIn the post-independence era from 1950 to 1990 India had a socialist nuance to its policies, with five-year plans focused on the eradication of poverty, greater food production, and industrialization; the state was the major actor. But the failure of land reform and gradual shift from self-reliance to import dependence led to an economic crisis. Privatization and disinvestment by the government was accompanied by acquisition of land for private and multinational industrial development and for mining operations. Many adivasis, dalits, and farmers became contract laborers or migrated to city slums. The Institute advocated increased productivity in the small-holder farming sector and growth in the internal market. The primary task of ISI-B in the 1990s was to train members of the working class to resist privatization that might threaten the inclusiveness of the social fabric of the nation.\n\nFrom 1993 onwards, ISI-B began to organize outreach programs in the states of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, and Tamil Nadu, and later in Telangana. The units themselves were established only in 2001 after much discussion. Democratization of knowledge is the underlying foundation of these programs which are designed to educate in socio-cultural realities, animation skills, and an egalitarian value perspective. Grassroots activists, leaders of people’s movements, college students, and elected representatives of Panchayati Raj Institutions are among those making use of the outreach programs. They are local in nature, use the local language, and address specific needs.\n\nIn 2000, a Human Rights Unit was initiated to advocate at the national and international levels. In 2001 the outreach unites were initiated. A women's unit and a research unit were added. The Director in 2008 published his research on the agrarian crisis in India, tracing it in part to India's policy of globalization.\n\nBy 2011 the ISI-B was most heavily involved in training programmes, an Institute of values, extension work, and hosting NGO conferences including affordable accommodation facilities. In 2011 the general superior of the Jesuits included ISI-B headquarters during his trip to India.\n\nCurrent ISI-B programs are divided among various units: research, human rights and training, labour and migration, women, and library and documentation. Included in its priorities are advocacy and environmental concerns. It also enjoys the assistance of professional mediators. Some trained at the Institute have gone on to become leaders for change.\n\nAt the golden jubilee celebrations of the Institute in 2013, the goals for the way forward were to train and advocate toward strengthening the plural character of society (no controlling religion, class, or caste), to publicize the impact on the poor of the New Economic Policy, to help strengthen the Dalit Movement, and to join with others on various works in the public interest. Justice H.N. Nagamohan Das of Karnataka High Court inaugurated the golden jubilee celebrations and Ms. Teesta Setalvad, noted human rights activist, delivered the 7th Volken Memorial Lecture on the theme \"A Republic’s Dilemma: Constitutional Principles vs. Majoritarianism.\" This was the occasion for regional meetings of former trainees, a workshop on 20 years of neo-liberal policies, a research study, instituting of a Volken Memorial Golden Jubilee Award for an activist of the year, production of a documentary, initiation of a diploma course, and publication of a book that contains a history of the ISI-B. ISI-B serves as a publisher for social activists.\n", "id": "52923006", "title": "Indian Social Institute, Bangalore"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50316759", "text": "Xavier Institute of Development Action and Studies\n\nXavier Institute of Development Action and Studies (XIDAS) is a Business School in Jabalpur, India, inaugurated on 3 December 1995 by the Madhya Pradesh Society of Jesus. It is rated among the top business schools in India.\n\nThe Belgian Jesuit Fr. Micheal Van Den Bogaert, S.J., came to India in 1951. He served among the poor in rural areas and in 1963 became director of Xavier Institute of Social Service, Ranchi. In 1987 he established the Centre for Development Research and Training (CENDERET) in Bhubaneswar, and went on to found XIDAS in 1995. In continuity with the founder's vision, the Center envisions educating for social service and sustainable, holistic development.\n\nIn 1996 XIDAS was registered as a society under Society Registration Act of Madhya Pradesh, and began operating in the areas of research, project assessment and evaluation, training, and entrepreneurship development. Then in 1997 the Centres of Livelihood and Capacity Building were established in blocks and villages near Jabalpur. Research over the following years included a profile of Balaghat District with aid from BILANCE (now CORDAID, Belgium); studies conducted for NTPC Limited; and joint research on micro finance in Mandla District (MP) with support from UFSIA University, Antwerp.\n\nThe year 2000 saw the commencement of the MBA (Rural Management) programme and an exchange programme with Katholieke University Belgium. XIVANI newsletter was also launched. In 2001 the XIDAS extension in Raipur was established. In 2003 XIDAS moved to Tilhari, Mandla Road, Jabalpur.\n\nIn 2007 VIKAS VANI journal began publication along with the student magazine “The Catalyst”. In 2008 the Post Graduate Diploma in Management began, (AICTE approved), along with the launching of a one-year certificate course in Development Management and a six-months certificate course in Community Organization.\n\nIn 2010 a Post Graduate diploma in Telecom Management began, and in Rural Management in 2013, both AICTE approved. A Fr. Bogaert Memorial Lecture took place in 2011, 2014, and 2015. International conferences were held, on Corporate Social Responsibility in 2012 and on Sustainable Development in 2014. In 2015 the first national students meet HENOSIS tool place.\n\nPost Graduate Diploma in Management (PGDM) offers specialization in Marketing, Finance, and Human Resource and Post Graduate Diploma in Management–Rural Management (PGDM-RM) offers specialization in Rural Management. In second year, PGDM and PGDM-RM students have a choice of doing a major and minor specialization, in the areas of Finance, Marketing, and Human Resources.\n\nXIDAS has been involved in research and consultation in the area of corporate social responsibility, rehabilitation and resettlement, and livelihood promotion, for public and private sector organizations.\n\nXIDAS conducts socio-economic surveys, need assessment studies, social impact assessment, and management development programmes in the areas of social entrepreneurship and corporate social responsibility.\n\nAs to ecology, XIDAS takes up research, evaluation, training, awareness campaigns, and field projects.\n\nXIDAS has a special focus on research and training in areas related to rural development. Its health care focus is on the national rural health mission, reproductive and child health, nutrition, sanitation and hygiene.\n\nXIDAS enhances competencies amongst working professionals, managers, and executives. Training offered covers areas like finance, marketing, human resource management, rural development, urban governance, right to information, public distribution system, and watershed management.\n\nXIDAS collaborates with more than 48 government and public sector agencies, corporations, development organizations, research institutes, and academic bodies for undertaking social engineering, implementation, evaluations, consulting, trainings, research, academic and policy level deliberations, and other extension activities.\nXIDAS campus spreads over 12 acres of verdant, tranquil surroundings. XIDAS actively promotes a clean and green plastic-free campus and has set up two waste water recycling units inside the campus for sewage and wastewater management.\n", "id": "50316759", "title": "Xavier Institute of Development Action and Studies"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49279562", "text": "Loyola Industrial Training Institute, Ranipet\n\nLoyola Industrial Training Institute (ITI), Ranipet, was founded by the Jesuits in 2003 to educate marginalized youth of the Vellore District in Tamil Nadu, India, with vocational skills and eco-friendly consciousness.\n\nThe Jesuits of the Chennai Mission founded Loyola ITI in 2003, at the invitation of the Catholic Bishop of Vellore and in pursuit of their own vision: to provide a need-based training for unemployed youth, along with an integral education. Loyola is situated on 15 acres of land on the bank of the river Palar at Ranipet in Vellore District, 125 km west of Chennai and 25 km east of Vellore. Ranipet is an industrial town hosting companies like BHEL, EID Parry, Greaves, SAME (Tractors), and Malladi.\n\nThe institution opened on 31 July 2003 with the name Loyola Technical Training Centre (LTC), offering two courses: electrician and two-wheeler mechanism. After being recognized by Tamil Nadu Open University and the Ministry of Labour and Employment under the State Council of Vocational Training pattern, the name of the centre was changed to Loyola Community College (LCC) and Loyola Industrial School (LISc).\n\nThe syllabus of each trade is designed in consultation with industrial partners based on the need of the locality. All courses include life-coping skills, developmental English, and communication skills.<br>\nEligibility for the following diploma courses is an 8th std pass:\nEligibility for the following courses is a 10th std pass: M.R.A/C and MMV.\nSponsored activities include games, group discussions, plays, developing charts, and quizzes;\ntalent days and sports day; yoga for the residential students. Also a Leadership & Social Awareness Camp.\n", "id": "49279562", "title": "Loyola Industrial Training Institute, Ranipet"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50493781", "text": "Udayani Social Action Forum\n\nUdayani Social Action Forum (USAF) is the social outreach arm of the Calcutta Province of the Society of Jesus. It works with schools, parishes, spiritual centres, international immersion groups, NGOs, and other organizations to foster a faith that does justice. It also serves as a link between the Jesuit social apostolate in India and the priorities of the Jesuit Conference of the South Asian Assistancy. \nUSAF employs a rights-based approach to empowerment of the tribal peoples of West Bengal State. It both collaborates with the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Calcutta and is ecumenical in its cooperation with organizations of all faiths.\n\nThe Forum claims that it has \"played an important and vital role\" in coordinating efforts in defense of the right to food and work, Its director, Fr. Jothi, says that, when he was hesitant about his vocal public advocacy for the basic human needs of the people, the Mother Superior of the Missionaries of Charity came to his defense.\n\nUSAF was party to a joint statement by the India-Africa group opposing the policy of the World Trade Organization, and is involved in wage negotiations. It is also an Indian party to the international alliance against the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GAT).\n\nOther social justice issues in which USAF has been involved include help for the children of prisoners, defense of women's rights, opposition to human trafficking, support for environmentalism, the government funding seminar, and commentary on national elections.\n\n \n", "id": "50493781", "title": "Udayani Social Action Forum"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50091049", "text": "KPTT Agricultural Training Center\n\nKPTT Agricultural Training Center \"(Kursus Pertanian Taman Tani)\" is a Jesuit-run boarding and day school that teaches organic farming. It was founded in 1965 in , Central Java, Indonesia.\n\nKPTT advocates investment in sustainable products and technologies for new growth and preservation of the ecosphere. It sees the organic farmers it trains as agribusiness entrepreneurs. It seeks out new technologies that are culturally appropriate, environmentally sustainable, and economically profitable, clean technologies that use renewable energy or biomaterials. The benefit of poorer, small farmers is integral to its vision. The case of Muhammad Yunus and his micro-finance bank are used as an example of the potential of innovative thinking in this field.\n\nKPTT's curriculum includes both ecological-based agricultural training and business skills. Courses are offered specific to Indonesia's three time zones, with varying soils, climates, and cultures. Coursework covers the following areas: Organic Farming, Soil Fertility, Designing an Organic Farming Project, Producing Organic Pesticide, Managing and Maintaining Organic Farming, Husbandry, Biogas: Alternative Energy, Organic-processed Agricultural Products, Nutritional Value of Organic Farming Products, Agribusiness Management, Leadership, and Communication Skills. Small plots are available for students to defray their expenses while learning good farming practices.\n\nKPTT networks internationally with Jesuit business and commerce schools concerning marketing and business skills and with technical schools to share best practices with green and clean technologies. KPTT offers staff opportunities to update their training, in the interest of being innovative.\n\nSince 1965 (to 2009) KPTT has graduated 1116 from its year-long course; 2399 from its 3 months course; 269 from its short course (2006-2009); and exposed 9116 preschool and elementary school students to its training (2004 - 2009).\n", "id": "50091049", "title": "KPTT Agricultural Training Center"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50224893", "text": "ADZU Social Development Council\n\nADZU Social Development Council includes an institute and three centers, with a common goal of bringing greater, peace, harmony, and integral human development to the diverse peoples served by Ateneo de Zamboanga University in Western Mindanao, Philippines.\n\nThrough its social development outreach, ADZU addresses the challenges presented by impoverished people, conflict, globalization, and climate change, amidst the diverse communities on the island of Mindanao. It looks to work for healing and for a just peace while supporting eco-friendly development, with special attention to the poorest sectors of society. Leadership education and social transformation are central to its efforts.\n\nAteneo Peace Institute (API). Cultural conflict in Mindanao goes back to the intrusion of the Spanish 450 years ago into this formerly Moslem preserve, and persists in migration and turmoil amongst various ethnic groups, with sporadic conflict and military action. \nAPI responds with research, education, and consulting work in conjunction with others, fostering dialogue among various religious and cultural groups, as well as youth activities.\n\nCenter for Community Extension Services (CCES) since 1993 has been collaborating with other development organizations and with marginalized communities to improve literacy, health, and livelihood, with special attention to isolated communities in the area and on neighboring islands.\n\nSocial Awareness and Community Service Involvement (SACSI).\nThe acronym “SACSI” is Filipino for “witness”, which is the task of this organization internal to the university. Its purpose is to increase awareness within the university of the realities of life outside, to foster among both students and faculty the Jesuit ideal of being men and women for others. It trains and handles placement of student and faculty volunteers in service opportunities.\n\nAteneo Center for Leadership and Governance (ACLG).\nThis training center for leaders from both government and civil society extends its efforts to dialogue, advocacy, networking, and interdisciplinary research. Its projects include efforts to secure peaceful and fair elections.\n\n \n", "id": "50224893", "title": "ADZU Social Development Council"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40343958", "text": "Jesuit European Social Centre\n\nThe Jesuit European Social Centre is an organisation of the Society of Jesus, based in Brussels, that collaborates and publishes on social issues concerning Europe. It is a separate legal entity which operates within the Jesuit Conference of European Provincials.\n\nIt engages with the EU institutions and with ecclesial institutions such as the Commission of the Bishops' Conferences of the European Community (COMEC) and the Conference of European Churches (CEC).\n\nJESC cultivates and propagates relationships, whilst developing initiatives on a variety of themes ranging from Mineral Resources (especially the issue of conflict minerals) in Africa, to European Citizenship and Ecology. In JESC’s role co-ordinating an international ecology network it produces a bi-monthly online publication, \"Ecojesuit\". Further collaboration is undertaken with COMECE in producing a monthly journal, \"EuropInfos\". JESC seeks to operate in concert with other Jesuit works, whilst working with the poor and marginalised. In pursuit of solidarity beyond the borders of Europe, the Jesuits participate in networks with NGOs and volunteer programs.\n\nIt is an 'Association Internationale Sans But Lucratif' under Belgian law since 29 March 2012.\n\nAs of 1 January 2012, JEO-OCIPE (Brussels) was restructured and became JESC. JESC is included in the EU's Transparency Register, within the Section V: Organisations, which represents churches and religious communities with the identification number 73391376305-20.\n\nThe centre is located on Rue Cornet in Brussels to the east of the European Parliament, south of Parc du Cinquantenaire and north of the Etterbeek municipality.\n\n\n\n ", "id": "40343958", "title": "Jesuit European Social Centre"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50242380", "text": "Catholic Office of Information and Initiative for Europe\n\nThe Catholic Office of Information and Initiative for Europe (OCIPE) is a research and documentation center on ethics and European integration founded in 1956.\n\nThe predecessor of OCIPE was founded in 1950 at the request of Strasbourg Bishop and with the initiative of lay Catholics dedicated to the cause of the emerging Europe (Pierre Pflimlin, , ), and Bishop . A member of the \"Conference of International Catholic Organizations\" (OIC), it ceased operations in 1954 for lack of funds. In 1956, the Jesuits founded the \"Catholic Office for Information on European Issues\" (OCIPE) in Strasbourg. Its purpose has been to establish a research and documentation center on European issues, placing itself at the disposal of national and international Catholic organizations to inform them about the activities of European institutions and to facilitate their participation in these activities. \n\nFrom 1963, besides Strasbourg activity, primarily with the Council of Europe, OCIPE opened an office in Brussels for the institutions in the European Community.\n\nAfter the fall of the Berlin Wall, OCIPE opened in 1990 offices in Budapest and Warsaw, and on 7 March 1990 changed its name to \"Catholic Office of Information and Initiative for Europe.\" \n\nIn January 2012, the Society of Jesus in Europe created the Jesuit European Social Centre (JESC), located in Brussels and under the Chairman of the Conference of European Jesuit Provincials. The Brussels team OCIPE merged into JESC and, in parallel, teams of OCIPE in Budapest and Warsaw were transformed into social centers attached to local provinces of the Society of Jesus.\n\nOCIPE's mission is to carry out studies and analyses on politics and decision-making, economics and society, for the European Union, as well as on changes in mentality, customs, and religiosity in Europe.\n\nOn 2 May 1967, on the occasion of the tenth anniversary of the creation of the Office, Pope Paul VI sent the message: The Holy Father, you know, has repeatedly drawn attention of Christians to the extreme importance of international work in the world today. This is often seen regarding Europe in particular, and most recently the intense interest with which the Holy See follows and encourages all those who work for the blessed and peaceful future of this continent so rich in history. It can therefore only welcome the contribution made by OCIPE [...], reflection and action of Christians to promote the achievement of the European common good and ensure the influence of spiritual values through new institutions to implement this.\n\nThe object of OCIPE as defined 7 March 1990 is to \n\nOCIPE participates in the work of the European Union, such as contributing to the drafting of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union.\n\nAt the end of 2012, OCIPE launched the project \"Education and Active Citizenship in the European context.\" This project was taken up by JESC through a symposium held on 31 January 2013 with the European Economic and Social Committee in Brussels, then by OCIPE as co-organizer with the European Union of Former Students of Catholic Education () in a Strasbourg conference on 12 June 2013.\n\nIn January 2013, after the creation of Jesuit European Social Centre, OCIPE returned to its first mission among European circles in Strasbourg, including the Council of Europe. Once again a group consisting largely of lay people, it remains in close relationship with the Jesuits.\n\nSuccessive presidents of OCIPE have been Alexander Grunelius (elected in 1956), Émile Baas, Jacques Grosclaude, Jean Schlick (1982-1988), and Laurent Gregoire after 1988.\n\nSuccessive directors of OCIPE were Albert Le Roy (Jesuit, 1956-1958), Emile Gabel (Assumptionist, 1958-1960), former director of the newspaper Cross, Jean Weydert (Jesuit, 1960-1981), Tegvev Gabor (1982-1991), Jef van Gerwen (Jesuit, 1991-1992), Jean-Mathieu Lochten (Jesuit, 1992-1995), (Jesuit, 1997-2003); finally, before becoming editor of the magazine , Jan Kerkhofs (Jesuit, 2003-2005), and then Frank Turner (Jesuit, 2005-2012).\n\nFrom 1959 to 1978 OCIPE published in French and German the \" Letter of OCIPE \" which became in June 1978 the French \" Target Europe \" and the German \" Projekt Europa\".\n\nIn January 1999, the magazine of OCIPE merged with that of the Commission of the Bishops' Conferences of the European Community (COMECE) to give birth to \"Europe Infos\", the joint review of both organizations. Since 2012, \"Europe Infos\" is an electronic monthly newsletter published by COMECE and the JESC.\n\n\n\n \n", "id": "50242380", "title": "Catholic Office of Information and Initiative for Europe"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51709650", "text": "Jesuitenmission\n\nJesuitenmission, the mission arm of the Society of Jesus in Germany, directs its assistance to the German Jesuit foreign missions, mainly in India, East Timor, China, and Zimbabwe. Pursuing the service of faith and promotion of justice, its works include combating poverty, refugee assistance, education, health, ecology, human rights and pastoral work, while fostering dialogue between cultures and religions. The work extends to posting of volunteers and political advocacy, as in its campaign \"Tax against poverty: FTT\". A sampling of projects it has fostered and subsidized is given below.\n\nThe Diocese of Chinhoyi, founded by German Jesuits and regularly under Jesuit Bishops, provides education, health care, and social assistance for a destitute rural population. In every parish there are different groups, guilds, and small Christian communities that make up the pastoral and social network of neighborhood assistance for the sick, as well as for AIDS orphans, widows, and elderly who lack basic foodstuffs. Wells and storage tanks are also built to serve the people in this arid area of Zimbabwe.\n\nCurrent projects include a Tariro daycare and after-school care center for AIDS orphans, opened in 2003, now accommodating about 235 orphans.\n\nThe Jesuit Fr. Joe Arimoso founded the \"Bright Stars Soccer Academy\" in the small town of Norton near Harare to help young people who have family and school problems, giving them a sense of values such as fairness, teamwork, mutual responsibility, and duty. So far, 50 boys and 25 girls are registered in the Academy, and many receive support for school fees. For long-term viability, Arimoso launched a chicken farm; and a hair salon opened in which the girls can learn the craft and earn some income.\n\nin 2006 Jesuitenmission was instrumental in the building of Casa Ricci Social Services in Maowangdong, a leprosy rehabilitation center, which today houses over 40 lepers. Extension services from Casa Ricci assist over 4,000 leprosy patients, including infrastructural improvements in their villages: water and electricity, roads, and schools. Casa Ricci also began a low-interest loan program for replacing mud huts with new homes. Homes for orphans, with access to education, have also been provided.\n\nSince the end of the independence struggle in 2002, East Timor needs to see its educational infrastructure rebuilt with schools and well-trained teachers. Jesuiten assisted with the school in Kasait that opened in 2013. Since 2012, a facility for teacher training has been provided, with classrooms, library, and sports grounds.\n\nThe Irulars are the second largest indigenous tribe in the northern part of the state of Tamil Nadu with 210,000 members. Eighty-one percent of Irulars live below the poverty line and are in debt. Sixty-six percent are illiterate and often see no need in sending their children to school. But the Jesuits see education as the path to independence and human betterment. Evening schools have been set up in 25 villages to enhance the chances of success for schoolchildren. Also self-help groups have been founded for women to keep them out of the clutches of money-lenders.\n\nJesuitenmission also supports a number of projects in India: six kindergartens (Community Child Care Program) in Lova Ponnavolu, Gunti, M. Gadaburu, Pedapachili, Kondavedi, and Chamalavaka; two vocational schools for older teens in Rajupalem and Puthur; four health programs in Chilakavanipalem, Mahatmajipuram, Madagam, and Yercaud; and a tailoring course as a special program to help women in Kothapatnam.\n\nIn Loyola-Gymnasium in Prizren, Kosovo boys and girls learn collaborative and responsible cooperation in the young, crisis-ridden country. Young people of diverse race and religion meet, shed prejudices, and develop friendships. The promotion of girls in this predominantly Muslim country is a special focus. In 2005 Loyola-Gymnasium was opened under the direction of Jesuit Fr. Walter Happel, S.J.\n\nThe new Xavier Jesuit School in Sisophon, Cambodia, is incorporating kindergarten, primary and secondary schools, teacher training, and a kind of folk high school for residents of the surrounding villages, plus tutoring and special courses for school dropouts.\n\nThe Syrian Jesuits are supported in their local networks of assistance. Christians and Muslims visit families together, and distribute blankets, mattresses, cooking utensils, and food, while locating accommodations and teaching games to the children. Two field kitchens in Aleppo and Damascus cook daily with 16,000 meals for the families living in shelters. Due to the escalating violence some of the programs are interrupted.\n\n", "id": "51709650", "title": "Jesuitenmission"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50248393", "text": "Social Justice and Ecology Secretariat\n\nSocial Justice and Ecology Secretariat (SJES) at the Jesuit headquarters in Rome has as its main task to assist the Superior General of the Society of Jesus and the 105 Jesuit provinces constituting six conferences throughout the world to formulate policy and organize activities in the furtherance of social justice and ecology.\n\nThe Society of Jesus in its four General Congregations since 1974 has determined to integrate into all of its works a faith that does justice. It proposes to do this by educating men and women for others in its 500 educational institutions, by maintaining more than 500 organizations aimed primarily at socio-economic development, and by including the component of a universal charity that does justice into its retreat and pastoral work. These efforts are aimed at sustainable human development and a more just and compassionate human community, at both local and global levels.\n\nThe Social Justice and Ecology Secretariat is charged with the mission of:\n\nThe breadth of its concerns is evident from some of the Jesuit-related news reports on its website for March–April 2016:\n\n \n", "id": "50248393", "title": "Social Justice and Ecology Secretariat"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51732721", "text": "Jesuit Centre for Faith and Justice, Dublin\n\nJesuit Centre for Faith and Justice, Dublin, is an agency of the Irish province of the Society of Jesus (Jesuits). The Centre researches, publishes, advocates, and networks on social justice issues such as prison reform, housing, ecology, refugees, health policy, and on renewal in the Catholic Church.\n\n", "id": "51732721", "title": "Jesuit Centre for Faith and Justice, Dublin"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51693784", "text": "Gonçalo da Silveira Foundation\n\nGonçalo da Silveira Foundation (FGS – \"Fundação Gonçalo da Silveira\"), founded in 2004, is an NGO for development and the social outreach arm of the Portuguese Province of the Society of Jesus.\n\nThe Gonçalo da Silveira Foundation (FGS) was formed in April 2004 to coordinate the social development and mission efforts of the Portuguese Jesuits. including fundraising, domestic projects, and preparation of projects to be implemented by the missionaries. FGS aims to improve the living conditions of the most disadvantaged communities, particularly in Lusophone countries. FGS works to contribute to integral human development and to sensitize society to the values of equality, social justice, and global citizenship, in harmony with the environment.\n\nFGS is a member of the Xavier Foundation Network with five similar European institutions of the Society of Jesus, ALBOAN (Spain), Entreculturas (Spain), Jesuitenmission (Germany), Leigos parfa o desenvolvimento (Portugal), and MAGIS (Italy).\n\nThe following are examples of the work of the Gonçalo da Silveira Foundation.\n\n\n\n\n", "id": "51693784", "title": "Gonçalo da Silveira Foundation"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51718889", "text": "ALBOAN\n\nALBOAN is the outreach arm of the Loyola Province of the Society of Jesus for development and social action. It was founded in 1994 but has roots in mission secretariats in San Sebastián, in Gujarat, India, and in the Far East. It is situated in the Basque country of Bilbao and Pamplona. In 2004 support for Fe y Alegría was incorporated into ALBOAN. In 2009 offices opened in all provincial capitals and Navarre, with headquarters in Vitoria. ALBOAN undertakes development projects in countries in the southern hemisphere, as well as in autonomous region of Spain where it is situated. It is highly involved in research and advocacy.\n\nALBOAN, together with the Carmen Gandarias Foundation, has financed several projects. In Nicaragua between 2007 and 2009 modern technologies and the training of 120 teachers to use these technologies was subsidized for 20 schools. This included computers, printers, and audiovisual equipment. In Tchad in 2010, 8 schools with more than 2,500 students were refurbishing and equipped and teachers trained. In Colombia from 2011 to 2014, assistance was given for the education of more than 4,000 young people in five depressed regions of the country. Then from 2013 until 2016 assistance went to 26 rural schools with 750 students in the Amazonian region of Pucallpa, Peru.\n\nALBOAN helped with the production of the Oscar-nominated short film \"That Wasn't Me.\" It also helps subsidize the work of organizations like the Jesuit Refugee Service, as in it efforts to assist displaced persons on the Colombian-Venezuelan border. It gives widespread assistance to refugees and migrants. ALBOAN's funds are supplemented through foundations like the Basque science foundation Ikerbasque.\n\nALBOAN's projects in India include cooperation with AROUSE to train leaders in the Ranchi area who will help the people achieve autonomy and self-determination. ALBOAN has been supporting rural cooperatives in the DRC for ten years, with very positive results. ALBOAN cooperates with the government of Navarre for education projects in Spain and Nicaragua, assistance for indigenous communities in Colombia, and assisting in productivity among women in Peru.\n\nThe research team at ALBOAN has published in areas like \"Breaking the links between conflict and natural resources\", minerals regulation, socio-cultural animation and citizen participation, food security, artisanal mining in Africa, labour migration, the global situation of women and children in forced migration, nuclear decommissioning, sustainable development. It is an associate with Lund University in the Swedish South Asian Studies Network. It also sponsors conferences, as on \"Culture and Human Development in Africa.\"\n", "id": "51718889", "title": "ALBOAN"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49980168", "text": "List of Jesuit development centres\n\nThis is a partial list of centres founded worldwide by the Society of Jesus (Jesuits) which are directed primarily toward social and economic development for the poor and marginalized. Included in this would be research, training, advocacy, and action for human development, as well as direct services. While a city is listed for most of the organizations, it is difficult to describe the locale in which many of them operate, as with the Jesuit Refugee Service which in 2015 was active in 51 countries.\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\"No web presence found, November 2017\":\n\n\n\n\n\n", "id": "49980168", "title": "List of Jesuit development centres"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53274595", "text": "Ignatian Solidarity Network\n\nIgnatian Solidarity Network (ISN) organizes Jesuit schools and universities in the United States, together with their alumni and all interested parties, in training and advocacy for social justice leadership. This is in pursuit of \"the service of faith and promotion of justice\" that was emphasized by Jesuit Father General Pedro Arrupe and by the Catholic bishops after Vatican II. The founding of ISN was in response to the US connection in the 1989 murders of Jesuits in El Salvador.\n\nThe Network sponsors an annual Ignatian Family Teach-in for Justice in Washington, D.C., which had begun in 1998. This draws delegations from Jesuit schools throughout the country and abroad. Issues represented cover a wide spectrum including peace and justice, US military alliances with African leaders, just employment policy, immigration and refugees, and environmentalism. ISN also sponsors leadership retreats and promotes conferences at Jesuit universities which included in four months of 2017 topics such as climate change, LGBT rights, student leadership, and global collaboration among Jesuit universities.\n\nISN emails its monthly newsletter to all subscribers, informing on issues that include environmental justice, fair trade, non-villence and peace, immigration, domestic poverty, worker rights, human rights in Africa, human rights in Latin America, and racial justice. It regularly solicits signatures advocating public policy initiatives. Other services include:\n", "id": "53274595", "title": "Ignatian Solidarity Network"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=212614", "text": "Rural area\n\nIn general, a rural area or countryside is a geographic area that is located outside towns and cities. The Health Resources and Services Administration of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services defines the word \"rural\" as encompassing \"...all population, housing, and territory not included within an urban area. Whatever is not urban is considered rural.\"\n\nTypical rural areas have a low population density and small settlements. Agricultural areas are commonly rural, as are other types of areas such as forest. Different countries have varying definitions of \"rural\" for statistical and administrative purposes.\n\nIn Canada, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development defines a \"predominantly rural region\" as having more than 50% of the population living in rural communities where a \"rural community\" has a population density less than 150 people per square kilometre. In Canada, the census division has been used to represent \"regions\" and census consolidated sub-divisions have been used to represent \"communities\". Intermediate regions have 15 to 49 percent of their population living in a rural community. Predominantly urban regions have less than 15 percent of their population living in a rural community. Predominantly rural regions are classified as rural metro-adjacent, rural non-metro-adjacent and rural northern, following Ehrensaft and Beeman (1992). Rural metro-adjacent regions are predominantly rural census divisions which are adjacent to metropolitan centres while rural non-metro-adjacent regions are those predominantly rural census divisions which are not adjacent to metropolitan centres. Rural northern regions are predominantly rural census divisions that are found either entirely or mostly above the following lines of parallel in each province: Newfoundland and Labrador, 50th; Quebec 54th; Ontario, 54th; Manitoba, 53rd; Saskatchewan, Alberta and British Columbia, 54th. As well, rural northern regions encompass all of the Yukon, Northwest Territories and Nunavut.\n\nStatistics Canada defines rural for their population counts. This definition has changed over time (see Appendix A in du Plessis et al., 2002). Typically, it has referred to the population living outside settlements of 1,000 or fewer inhabitants. The current definition states that census rural is the population outside settlements with fewer than 1,000 inhabitants and a population density below 400 people per square kilometre (Statistics Canada, 2007).\n\n84% of the United States' inhabitants live in suburban and urban areas, but cities occupy only 10 percent of the country. Rural areas (villages) occupy the remaining 90 percent. The U.S. Census Bureau, the USDA's Economic Research Service, and the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) have come together to help define rural areas. United States Census Bureau: The Census Bureau definitions (new to the 2000 census), which are based on population density, defines rural areas as all territory outside Census Bureau-defined urbanized areas and urban clusters. \n\nUSDA\n\n\nOMB:\n\nUnder the Core Based Statistical Areas used by the OMB (commonly referred to as 'CBSA Codes'), \n\nIn 2014, the USDA updated their rural / non-rural area definitions based on the 2010 Census counts.\n\nNational Center for Education Statistics (NCES) revised its definition of rural schools in 2006 after working with the Census Bureau to create a new locale classification system to capitalize on improved geocoding technology.\n\nRural health definitions can be different for establishing under-served areas or health care accessibility in rural areas of the United States. According to the handbook, Definitions of Rural: A Handbook for Health Policy Makers and Researchers, \"Residents of metropolitan counties are generally thought to have easy access to the relatively concentrated health services of the county's central areas. However, some metropolitan counties are so large that they contain small towns and rural, sparsely populated areas that are isolated from these central clusters and their corresponding health services by physical barriers.\" To address this type of rural area, \"Harold Goldsmith, Dena Puskin, and Dianne Stiles (1992) described a methodology to identify small towns and rural areas within large metropolitan counties (LMCs) that were isolated from central areas by distance or other physical features.\" This became the Goldsmith Modification definition of rural. \"Bhoomeet rural education The Goldsmith Modification has been useful for expanding the eligibility for federal programs that assist rural populations—to include the isolated rural populations of large metropolitan counties.\"\n\nHealth care delivery in rural areas of the United States can be challenging. From 2005-2011, the rate of potentially preventable hospitalizations for acute conditions was highest in rural areas (as compared to large metropolitan, small metropolitan, or micropolitan areas).\n\nIn Brazil, there are different notions of \"rural area\" and \"countryside\". Rural areas are any place outside a municipality's urban development (buildings, streets) and it's carried by informal usage. Otherwise, countryside (\"interior\" in Portuguese) are officially defined as all municipalities outside the state/territory capital's metropolitan region. Some states as Mato Grosso do Sul doesn't have any metropolitan region, thus all of the state, except its capital is officially \"countryside\". Rio de Janeiro is singular in Brazil and it's de facto a \"metropolitan state\", as circa 70% of its population are located in Greater Rio. In the Federal District it's not applicable and there's no countryside as all of it is treated as the federal capital. Brasília is \"nominally\" the capital, but the \"capitality\" is shared through all Federal District, because Brazil de facto defines its capital as a municipality, and in municipal matters, the Federal District is treated and governs as a single municipality, city-state-like (Brasília, DF).\n\nThe country is divided into 402 administrative districts: 295 rural districts and 107 urban districts. Germany is among the largest agricultural producers in the European Union. More than half of Germany's territory – almost 19 million hectares – is used for farming, and are located in the rural areas. Almost 10% of employees in Germany has work linked directly or indirectly with the agricultural, forest and fisheries sectors; approximately a fifth of them are employed in primary production. The implication is that, unlike in some other European countries, where rural areas are known for being backward when compared to urban areas, in Germany, the trend is changing. Due to the country's policy of equal living conditions, this is not the case in Germany. Rural areas receive nearly equivalent attention as the urban areas do. Also, through a special approach to rural development, usually referred to as Village Renewal, the challenges of rural Germany are taken care of.\n\nIreland is a very rural country with several urban centres. Agriculture is an important part of the country's economy. The varied landscape includes bogland, meadows, hills and mountains.\n\nIn Britain, \"rural\" is defined by the government Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA), using population data from the latest census, such as the United Kingdom Census 2001. These definitions have various grades, but the upper point is any local government area with less than 26% of its population living in a market town (\"market town\" being defined as any settlement which has permission to hold a street market). A number of measures are in place to protect the British countryside, including green belts.\n\nIn England an NHS patient is defined as rural if they live more than from either a doctor or a dispensing chemist. In Scotland a different definition of rural is used. This is important for defining whether the patient is expected to collect their own medicines. While doctors' surgeries in towns will not have a medicines dispensary instead expecting patients to use a high-street chemist to purchase their prescription medicines (in Scotland collection not purchase, as prescriptions are paid by the state), in rural village surgeries, an NHS medicines dispensary will be built into the same building.\n\nRural areas are also known as the 'countryside' or a 'village' in India. It has a very low population density. In rural areas, agriculture is the chief source of livelihood along with fishing, cottage industries, pottery etc.\n\nThe quest to discover the real rural India still continues in great earnest. Almost every economic agency today has a definition of rural India. Here are a few definitions:\n\nAccording to the Planning Commission, a town with a maximum population of 15,000 is considered rural in nature. In these areas the panchayat makes all the decisions. There are five persons in the panchayat.\nThe National Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO) defines ‘rural’ as follows:\nRBI defines rural areas as those areas with a population of less than 49,000 (tier -3 to tier-6 cities).\n\nIt is generally said that the rural areas house up to 70% of India’s population. Rural India contributes a large chunk to India’s GDP by way of agriculture, self-employment, services, construction etc. As per a strict measure used by the National Sample Survey in its 63rd round, called monthly per capita expenditure, rural expenditure accounts for 55% of total national monthly expenditure. The rural population currently accounts for one-third of the total Indian FMCG sales.\n\nRural residence is a fertility factor, with total fertility rates and pregnancy being higher among women in rural areas than among women in urban areas and the rural population is much younger than urban areas.\n\n", "id": "212614", "title": "Rural area"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1859694", "text": "Bioindicator\n\nA bioindicator is any species (an \"indicator species\") or group of species whose function, population, or status can reveal the qualitative status of the environment. For example, copepods and other small water crustaceans that are present in many water bodies can be monitored for changes (biochemical, physiological, or behavioural) that may indicate a problem within their ecosystem. Bioindicators can tell us about the cumulative effects of different pollutants in the ecosystem and about how long a problem may have been present, which physical and chemical testing cannot.\n\nA biological monitor, or biomonitor, can be defined as an organism that provides quantitative information on the quality of the environment around it. Therefore, a good biomonitor will indicate the presence of the pollutant and also attempt to provide additional information about the amount and intensity of the exposure.\n\nA biological indicator is also the name given to a process for assessing the sterility of an environment through the use of resistant microorganism strains (eg. Bacillus or Geobacillus). Biological indicators can be described as the introduction of a highly resistant microorganisms to a given environment before Sterilization_(microbiology), tests are conducted to measure the effectiveness of the sterilization processes. As biological indicators use highly resistant microorganisms, you can be assured that any sterilization process that renders them inactive will have also killed off more common, weaker pathogens.\nA bioindicator is an organism or biological response that reveals the presence of the pollutants by the occurrence of typical symptoms or measurable responses and is, therefore, more qualitative. \nThese organisms (or communities of organisms) deliver information on alterations in the environment or the quantity of environmental pollutants by changing in one of the following ways: physiologically, chemically or behaviourally. \nThe information can be deduced through the study of:\n\n\nThe importance and relevance of biomonitors, rather than man-made equipment, is justified by the statement: \"There is no better indicator of the status of a species or a system than a species or system itself.\" Bioindicators have the ability to indicate indirect biotic effects of pollutants when many physical or chemical measurements cannot. Through bioindicators, scientists need to observe only the single indicating species to check on the environment rather than monitor the whole community.\n\nThe use of a biomonitor is described as biological monitoring (\"abbr.\" biomonitoring) and is the use of the properties of an organism to obtain information on certain aspects of the biosphere. Biomonitoring of air pollutants can be passive or active. Passive methods observe plants growing naturally within the area of interest. Active methods detect the presence of air pollutants by placing test plants of known response and genotype into the study area.\n\nBioaccumulative indicators are frequently regarded as biomonitors. Depending on the organism selected and their use, there are several types of bio-indicators.\n\nThe presence or absence of certain plant or other vegetative life in an ecosystem can provide important clues about the health of the environment: environmental preservation.\n\nThere are several types of plant and fungi biomonitors, including mosses, lichens, tree bark, bark pockets, tree rings, leaves, and fungi.\n\nLichens are organisms comprising both fungi and algae. They are found on rocks and tree trunks, and they respond to environmental changes in forests, including changes in forest structure – conservation biology, air quality, and climate. The disappearance of lichens in a forest may indicate environmental stresses, such as high levels of sulfur dioxide, sulfur-based pollutants, and nitrogen oxides.\nThe composition and total biomass of algal species in aquatic systems serve as an important metric for organic water pollution and nutrient loading such as nitrogen and phosphorus.\nThere are genetically engineered organisms that can respond to toxicity levels in the environment; \"e.g.\", a type of genetically engineered grass that grows a different colour if there are toxins in the soil.\n\nChanges in animal populations, whether increases or decreases, can indicate pollution. For example, if pollution causes depletion of a plant, animal species that depend on that plant will experience population decline. Conversely, overpopulation may be opportunistic growth of a species in response to loss of other species in an ecosystem. On the other hand, stress-induced sub-lethal effects can me manifested in animal physiology, morphology, and behaviour of individuals long before responses are expressed and observed at the population level. Such sub-lethal responses can be very useful as \"early warning signals\" to predict how population will further respond. \n\nPollution and other stress agents can be monitored by measuring any of several variables in animals: the concentration of toxins in animal tissues; the rate at which deformities arise in animal populations; behaviour in the field or in the laboratory; and by assessing changes in individual physiology . \n\nAmphibians, particularly anurans which consist of frogs and toads, are increasingly used as bioindicators of contaminant accumulation in pollution studies. Anurans absorb toxic chemicals through their skin and larval gill membranes and are sensitive to alterations in their environment. They have a poor ability to detoxify pesticides that are absorbed, inhaled, or ingested by eating contaminated food. This allows residues, especially of organochlorine pesticides, to accumulate in their systems. They also have permeable skin that can easily absorb toxic chemicals, making them a model organism for assessing the effects of environmental factors that may cause the declines of the amphibian population. These factors allow them to be used as bioindicator organisms to follow changes in their habitats and in ecotoxicological studies due to humans increasing demands on the environment.\n\nKnowledge and control of environmental agents is essential for sustaining the health of ecosystems. Anurans are increasingly utilized as bioindicator organisms in pollution studies such as studying the effects of agricultural pesticides on the environment. Environmental assessment to study the environment in which they live in is performed by analyzing their abundance in the area as well as assessing their locomotive ability and any abnormal morphological changes, which are deformities and abnormalities in development. Decline of anurans and malformations could also suggest increased exposure to ultra-violet light and parasites.\n\nPond breeding anurans are especially sensitive to pollution because of their complex life cycles, which could consist of terrestrial and aquatic living. During the embryonic development of them, morphological and behavioral alterations are the effects most frequently cited in connection with chemical exposures. Effects of exposure may result in shorter body length, lower body mass and malformations of limbs or other organs. The slow development, late morphological change, and small metamorph size result in increased risk of mortality and exposure to predation.\n\nMicroorganisms can be used as indicators of aquatic or terrestrial ecosystem health. Found in large quantities, microorganisms are easier to sample than other organisms. Some microorganisms will produce new proteins, called stress proteins, when exposed to contaminants such as cadmium and benzene. These stress proteins can be used as an early warning system to detect changes in levels of pollution.\n\nMicrobial Prospecting for oil and gas (MPOG) is often used to identify prospective areas for oil and gas occurrences. In many cases oil and gas is known to seep toward the surface as a hydrocarbon reservoir will usually leak or have leaked towards the surface through buoyancy forces overcoming sealing pressures. These hydrocarbons can alter the chemical and microbial occurrences found in the near surface soils or can be picked up directly. Techniques used for MPOG include DNA analysis, simple bug counts after culturing a soil sample in a hydrocarbon based medium or by looking at the consumption of hydrocarbon gases in a culture cell.\n\nMicroalgae have gained attention in the recent years due to several reasons because of their greater sensitivity to pollutants than many other organisms. In addition, they occur abundantly in nature, they are an essential component in very many food webs, they are easy to culture and to use in assays and there are few if any ethical issues involved in their use.\n\n\"Euglena gracilis\" is a motile freshwater photosynthetic flagellate. Although \"Euglena\" is rather tolerant to acidity, it responds rapidly and sensitively to environmental stresses such as heavy metals or inorganic and organic compounds. Typical responses are the inhibition of movement and the change of orientation parameters. Moreover, this organism is very easy to handle and grow, making it a very useful tool for eco-toxicological assessments. One very useful particularity of this organism is the gravitactic orientation, which is very sensitive to pollutants. The gravireceptors are impaired by pollutants such as heavy metals and organic or inorganic compounds. Therefore, the presence of such substances is associated with random movement of the cells in the water column. For short term tests, gravitactic orientation of \"E. gracilis\" is very sensitive.\nOther species such as \"Paramecium biaurelia\" (see \"Paramecium aurelia\") also use gravitactic orientation.\n\nAutomatic bioassay is possible, using the flagellate \"Euglena gracilis\" in a device which measures their motility at different dilutions of the possibly polluted water sample, to determine the EC50(the concentration of sample which affects 50 percent of organisms) and the G-value (lowest dilution factor at which no-significant toxic affect can be measured).\n\nMacroinvertebrates are useful and convenient indicators of the ecological health of water bodies and terrestrial ecosystems . They are almost always present, and are easy to sample and identify. The sensitivity of the range of macroinvertebrates found will enable an objective judgement of the ecological condition to be made. Tolerance values are commonly used to assess water pollution and environmental degradation, such as human activities (e.g. selective logging and wildfires) in tropical forests .\n\nIn Europe, a remote online biomonitoring system was designed in 2006. It is based on bivalve molluscs and the exchange of real time data between a remote intelligent device in the field (able to work for more than 1 year without \"in-situ\" human intervention) and a data centre designed to capture, process and distribute on the web information derived from the data. The technique relates bivalve behaviour, specifically shell gaping activity, to water quality changes. This technology has been successfully used for the assessment of coastal water quality in various countries (France, Spain, Norway, Russia, Svalbard (Ny Alesund) and New Caledonia).\n\nIn the United States, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) published \"Rapid Bioassessment Protocols,\" in 1999, based on measuring macroinvertebrates, as well as periphyton and fish for assessment of water quality.\n\nIn South Africa, the Southern African Scoring System (SASS) method is based on benthic macroinvertebrates, and is used for the assessment of water quality in Southern African rivers. The SASS aquatic biomonitoring tool has been refined over the past 30 years and is now on the fifth version (SASS5) in accordance with the ISO/IEC 17025 protocol. The SASS5 method is used by the South African Department of Water Affairs as a standard method for River Health Assessment, which feeds the national River Health Programme and the national Rivers Database.\n\nThe imposex phenomenon in the dog conch species of sea snail leads to the abnormal development of a penis in females, but does not cause sterility. Because of this, the species has been suggested as a good indicator of pollution with organic man-made tin compounds in Malaysian ports.\n\n\n\n", "id": "1859694", "title": "Bioindicator"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1677930", "text": "Seed dispersal\n\nSeed dispersal is the movement or transport of seeds away from the parent plant. Plants have very limited mobility and consequently rely upon a variety of dispersal vectors to transport their propagules, including both abiotic and biotic vectors. Seeds can be dispersed away from the parent plant individually or collectively, as well as dispersed in both space and time. The patterns of seed dispersal are determined in large part by the dispersal mechanism and this has important implications for the demographic and genetic structure of plant populations, as well as migration patterns and species interactions. There are five main modes of seed dispersal: gravity, wind, ballistic, water, and by animals. Some plants are serotinous and only disperse their seeds in response to an environmental stimulus.\n\nSeed dispersal is likely to have several benefits for plant species. First, seed survival is often higher away from the parent plant. This higher survival may result from the actions of density-dependent seed and seedling predators and pathogens, which often target the high concentrations of seeds beneath adults. Competition with adult plants may also be lower when seeds are transported away from their parent.\n\nSeed dispersal also allows plants to reach specific habitats that are favorable for survival, a hypothesis known as directed dispersal. For example, \"Ocotea endresiana\" (Lauraceae) is a tree species from Latin America which is dispersed by several species of birds, including the three-wattled bellbird. Male bellbirds perch on dead trees in order to attract mates, and often defecate seeds beneath these perches where the seeds have a high chance of survival because of high light conditions and escape from fungal pathogens.\nIn the case of fleshy-fruited plants, seed-dispersal in animal guts (endozoochory) often enhances the amount, the speed, and the asynchrony of germination, which can have important plant benefits.\n\nSeeds dispersed by ants (myrmecochory) are not only dispersed short distances but are also buried underground by the ants. These seeds can thus avoid adverse environmental effects such as fire or drought, reach nutrient-rich microsites and survive longer than other seeds. These features are peculiar to myrmecochory, which may thus provide additional benefits not present in other dispersal modes.\n\nFinally, at another scale, seed dispersal may allow plants to colonize vacant habitats and even new geographic regions. Dispersal distances and deposition sites depend on the movement range of the disperser, and longer dispersal distances are sometimes accomplished through diplochory, the sequential dispersal by two or more different dispersal mechanisms. In fact, recent evidence suggests that the majority of seed dispersal events involves more than one dispersal phase.\n\nSeed dispersal is sometimes split into \"autochory\" (when dispersal is attained using the plant's own means) and \"allochory\" (when obtained through external means).\n\nLong Distance Dispersal of Seeds\n\nLong distance seed dispersal (LDD) is a type of spatial dispersal that is currently defined by two forms, proportional and actual distance. A plant's fitness and survival may heavily depend on this method of seed dispersal depending on certain environmental factors. The first form of LDD, proportional distance, measures the percentage of seeds (1% out of total number of seeds produced) that travel the farthest distance out of a 99% probability distribution. The proportional definition of LDD is in actuality a descriptor for more extreme dispersal events. An example of LDD would be that of a plant developing a specific dispersal vector or morphology in order to allow for the dispersal of its seeds over a great distance. The actual or absolute method identifies LDD as a literal distance. It classifies 1 km as the threshold distance for seed dispersal. Here, threshold means the minimum distance a plant can disperse its seeds and have it still count as LDD. There is a second, unmeasurable, form of LDD besides proportional and actual. This is known as the non-standard form. Non-standard LDD is when seed dispersal occurs completely at random. An example of this would be if the lemur dependent dispersal of seeds from the deciduous trees of Madagascar were to wash ashore the coastline of South Africa via the attachment of mermaid purses laid by a shark or common skate.[6] A driving factor for the evolutionary significance of LDD is that it increases plant fitness by decreasing neighboring plant competition for offspring. However, it is still unclear today as to how specific traits, conditions and trade-offs (particularly within short seed dispersal) effect LDD evolution.\n\nAutochorous plants disperse their seed without any help from an external vector, as a result this limits plants considerably as to the distance they can disperse their seed.\nTwo other types of autochory not described in detail here are blastochory, where the stem of the plant crawls along the ground to deposit its seed far from the base of the plant, and herpochory (the seed crawls by means of trichomes and changes in humidity).\n\n\"Barochory\" or the plant use of gravity for dispersal is a simple means of achieving seed dispersal. The effect of gravity on heavier fruits causes them to fall from the plant when ripe. Fruits exhibiting this type of dispersal include apples, coconuts and passionfruit and those with harder shells (which often roll away from the plant to gain more distance). Gravity dispersal also allows for later transmission by water or animal.\n\n\"Ballochory\" is a type of dispersal where the seed is forcefully ejected by explosive dehiscence of the fruit. Often the force that generates the explosion results from turgor pressure within the fruit or due to internal tensions within the fruit. Some examples of plants which disperse their seeds autochorously include: \"Impatiens spp.\", \"Arceuthobium spp.\", \"Ecballium spp.\", \"Geranium spp.\", \"Cardamine hirsuta\" and others. An exceptional example of ballochory is \"Hura crepitans\"—this plant is commonly called the dynamite tree due to the sound of the fruit exploding. The explosions are powerful enough to throw the seed up to 100 meters.\n\nAllochory refers to any of many types of seed dispersal where a vector or secondary agent is used to disperse seeds. This vectors may include wind, water, animals or others.\n\nWind dispersal (\"anemochory\") is one of the more primitive means of dispersal. Wind dispersal can take on one of two primary forms: seeds can float on the breeze or alternatively, they can flutter to the ground. The classic examples of these dispersal mechanisms, in the temperate northern hemisphere, include dandelions, which have a feathery pappus attached to their seeds and can be dispersed long distances, and maples, which have winged seeds (samaras) and flutter to the ground. An important constraint on wind dispersal is the need for abundant seed production to maximize the likelihood of a seed landing in a site suitable for germination. There are also strong evolutionary constraints on this dispersal mechanism. For instance, Cody and Overton (1996) found that species in the Asteraceae on islands tended to have reduced dispersal capabilities (i.e., larger seed mass and smaller pappus) relative to the same species on the mainland. Also, \"Helonias bullata\", a species of perennial herb native to the United States, evolved to utilize wind dispersal as the primary seed dispersal mechanism; however, limited wind in its habitat prevents the seeds to successfully disperse away from its parents, resulting in clusters of population. Reliance on wind dispersal is common among many weedy or ruderal species. Unusual mechanisms of wind dispersal include tumbleweeds, where the entire plant is blown by the wind. \"Physalis\" fruits, when not fully ripe, may sometimes be dispersed by wind due to the space between the fruit and the covering calyx which acts as air bladder.\n\nMany aquatic (water dwelling) and some terrestrial (land dwelling) species use \"hydrochory\", or seed dispersal through water. Seeds can travel for extremely long distances, depending on the specific mode of water dispersal; this especially applies to fruits which are waterproof and float.\n\nThe water lily is an example of such a plant. Water lilies' flowers make a fruit that floats in the water for a while and then drops down to the bottom to take root on the floor of the pond.\nThe seeds of palm trees can also be dispersed by water. If they grow near oceans, the seeds can be transported by ocean currents over long distances, allowing the seeds to be dispersed as far as other continents.\n\nMangrove trees grow directly out of the water; when their seeds are ripe they fall from the tree and grow roots as soon as they touch any kind of soil. During low tide, they might fall in soil instead of water and start growing right where they fell. If the water level is high, however, they can be carried far away from where they fell. Mangrove trees often make little islands as dirt and other things collect in their roots, making little bodies of land.\n\nA special review for oceanic waters hydrochory can be seen at oceanic dispersal.\nAnimals can disperse plant seeds in several ways, all named \"zoochory\". Seeds can be transported on the outside of vertebrate animals (mostly mammals), a process known as \"epizoochory\". Plant species transported externally by animals can have a variety of adaptations for dispersal, including adhesive mucus, and a variety of hooks, spines and barbs. A typical example of an epizoochorous plant is \"Trifolium angustifolium\", a species of Old World clover which adheres to animal fur by means of stiff hairs covering the seed. Epizoochorous plants tend to be herbaceous plants, with many representative species in the families Apiaceae and Asteraceae. However, epizoochory is a relatively rare dispersal syndrome for plants as a whole; the percentage of plant species with seeds adapted for transport on the outside of animals is estimated to be below 5%. Nevertheless, epizoochorous transport can be highly effective if seeds attach to wide-ranging animals. This form of seed dispersal has been implicated in rapid plant migration and the spread of invasive species.\n\nSeed dispersal via ingestion by vertebrate animals (mostly birds and mammals), or \"endozoochory\", is the dispersal mechanism for most tree species. Endozoochory is generally a coevolved mutualistic relationship in which a plant surrounds seeds with an edible, nutritious fruit as a good food for animals that consume it. Birds and mammals are the most important seed dispersers, but a wide variety of other animals, including turtles and fish, can transport viable seeds. The exact percentage of tree species dispersed by endozoochory varies between habitats, but can range to over 90% in some tropical rainforests. Seed dispersal by animals in tropical rainforests has received much attention, and this interaction is considered an important force shaping the ecology and evolution of vertebrate and tree populations. In the tropics, large animal seed dispersers (such as tapirs, chimpanzees and hornbills) may disperse large seeds with few other seed dispersal agents. The extinction of these large frugivores from poaching and habitat loss may have negative effects on the tree populations that depend on them for seed dispersal. A variation of endozoochory is regurgitation rather than all the way through the digestive track.\n\nSeed dispersal by ants (\"myrmecochory\") is a dispersal mechanism of many shrubs of the southern hemisphere or understorey herbs of the northern hemisphere. Seeds of myrmecochorous plants have a lipid-rich attachment called the elaiosome, which attracts ants. Ants carry such seeds into their colonies, feed the elaiosome to their larvae and discard the otherwise intact seed in an underground chamber. Myrmecochory is thus a coevolved mutualistic relationship between plants and seed-disperser ants. Myrmecochory has independently evolved at least 100 times in flowering plants and is estimated to be present in at least 11 000 species, but likely up to 23 000 or 9% of all species of flowering plants. Myrmecochorous plants are most frequent in the fynbos vegetation of the Cape Floristic Region of South Africa, the kwongan vegetation and other dry habitat types of Australia, dry forests and grasslands of the Mediterranean region and northern temperate forests of western Eurasia and eastern North America, where up to 30–40% of understorey herbs are myrmecochorous.\n\nSeed predators, which include many rodents (such as squirrels) and some birds (such as jays) may also disperse seeds by hoarding the seeds in hidden caches. The seeds in caches are usually well-protected from other seed predators and if left uneaten will grow into new plants. In addition, rodents may also disperse seeds via seed spitting due to the presence of secondary metabolites in ripe fruits. Finally, seeds may be secondarily dispersed from seeds deposited by primary animal dispersers, a process known as diplochory. For example, dung beetles are known to disperse seeds from clumps of feces in the process of collecting dung to feed their larvae.\n\nOther types of zoochory are \"chiropterochory\" (by bats), \"malacochory\" (by molluscs, mainly terrestrial snails), \"ornithochory\" (by birds) and \"saurochory\" (by non-bird sauropsids). Zoochory can occur in more than one phase, for example through \"diploendozoochory\", where a primary disperser (an animal that ate a seed) along with the seeds it is carrying is eaten by a predator that then carries the seed further before depositing it.\n\nDispersal by humans (\"anthropochory\") used to be seen as a form of dispersal by animals. Recent research points out that human dispersers differ from animal dispersers by a much higher mobility based on the technical means of human transport. Dispersal by humans on the one hand may act on large geographical scales and lead to invasive species. On the other hand, dispersal by humans also acts on smaller, regional scales and drives the dynamics of existing biological populations. Humans may disperse seeds by many various means and some surprisingly high distances have been repeatedly measured. Examples are: dispersal on human clothes (up to 250 m), on shoes (up to 5 km) or by cars (regularly ~ 250 m, singles cases > 100 km).\n\nDeliberate seed dispersal also occurs as seed bombing. This has risks as unsuitable provenance may introduce genetically unsuitable plants to new environments.\n\nSeed dispersal has many consequences for the ecology and evolution of plants. Dispersal is necessary for species migrations, and in recent times dispersal ability is an important factor in whether or not a species transported to a new habitat by humans will become an invasive species. Dispersal is also predicted to play a major role in the origin and maintenance of species diversity. For example, myrmecochory increased the rate of diversification more than twofold in plant groups in which it has evolved because myrmecochorous lineages contain more than twice as many species as their non-myrmecochorous sister groups. Dispersal of seeds away from the parent organism has a central role in two major theories for how biodiversity is maintained in natural ecosystems, the Janzen-Connell hypothesis and recruitment limitation. Seed dispersal is essential in allowing forest migration of flowering plants.\n\nIn addition, the speed and direction of wind are highly influential in the dispersal process and in turn the deposition patterns of floating seeds in the stagnant water bodies. The transportation of seeds is led by the wind direction. This effects colonization situated on the banks of a river or to wetlands adjacent to streams relative to the distinct wind directions. The wind dispersal process can also effect connections between water bodies. Essentially, wind plays a larger role in the dispersal of waterborne seeds in a short period of time, days and seasons, but the ecological process allows the process to become balanced throughout a time period of several years. The time period of which the dispersal occurs is essential when considering the consequences of wind on the ecological process.\n\n", "id": "1677930", "title": "Seed dispersal"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53695767", "text": "Central American Historical Institute\n\nCentral American Historical Institute (\"Instituto Histórico Centroamericano\" – IHCA) is a non-profit civil association founded by the Society of Jesus in Managua, Nicaragua, in 1981. It is engaged in research and education on issues pertaining to the poor and to social transformation in Nicaragua and in all of Central America. \n\nCentral American Historical Institute is involved in journalistic research, reflection, analysis, communication, education, and social action, motivated by Christian principles and by an option for the poor that has been an increasing emphasis in Jesuit works since the 1970s. IHCA strives to assist all those who are interested in creating a more just and inclusive society in Nicaragua and in the rest of Central America. \n\nIn 1981, with the success of the Sandinista (FSLN) revolution, IHCA founded the review envio which carried articles in support of the principles which underpinned the Sandinista revolution against the Nicaraguan dictatorship. During this period it exposed the anti-Sandinista stance of \"La Prensa,\" the traditional newspaper in Nicaragua. It also promoted the place of women in the \"new Nicaraguan culture,\" and reflected on the economic model being employed in Nicaragua and on the situation of the indigenous peoples. It dealt extensively with the Nicaraguan coastal conflict. Since the electoral defeat of the FSLN in 1990, envio has turned its attention more to Central American and regional issues, offering information, analysis, and research. It is published monthly in Spanish, English, and Italian. \n\nContinuing to work toward \"the transformation of Nicaraguan and Central American society,\" IHCA offers programs within its Global Project. Since 1994 it has sponsored monthly workshops. Since 2003 it has offered leadership training programs for government leaders in Managua, Carazo, Masaya, and Granada. Since 2007 in conjunction with Central American University it has offered Nicaraguan students a diploma in Training for Political Citizenship. Special foci in IHCA's efforts are training the next generation of leaders and promoting gender equity.\n\nThe Institute is run by a staff of 7 full-time and 14 part-time workers involved in research, translation, and administration. Guardian Angel sisters, Jesuit scholastics, and dozens of dispersed people help to coordinate the training efforts. Offices of Central American Historical Institute are on the campus of Central American University in Managua.\n \n", "id": "53695767", "title": "Central American Historical Institute"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8839481", "text": "Plant health\n\nPlant health is concerned with \n\ncf. Medicinal plants\n", "id": "8839481", "title": "Plant health"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10368228", "text": "Resource\n\nA resource is a source or supply from which benefit is produced. Resources can be broadly classified on bases upon their availability they are renewable and non renewable resources.They can also be classified as actual and potential on the basis of level of development and use, on the basis of origin they can be classified as biotic and abiotic, and in the base of their distribution as ubiquitous and localized. An item becomes a resource with time and developing technology.Typically resources are materials, energy, services, staff, knowledge, or other assets that are transformed to produce benefit and in the process may be consumed or made unavailable. Benefits of resource utilization may include increased wealth or wants, proper functioning of a system, or enhanced well being. From a human perspective a natural resource is anything obtained from the environment to satisfy human needs and wants. From a broader biological or ecological perspective a resource satisfies the needs of a living organism (see biological resource).\n\nThe concept of resources has been applied in diverse realms, with respect to economics, biology and ecology, computer science, management, and human resources, and is linked to the concepts of competition, sustainability, conservation, and stewardship. In application within human society, commercial or non-commercial factors require resource allocation through resource management.\n\nResources have three main characteristics: utility, limited availability, and potential for depletion or consumption. Resources have been variously categorized as biotic versus abiotic, renewable versus non-renewable, and potential versus actual, along with more elaborate classification.\n\nIn economics a resource is defined as a service or other asset used to produce goods and services that meet human needs and wants. Economics itself has been defined as the study of how society manages its scarce resources. Classical economics recognizes three categories of resources, also referred to as factors of production: land, labour, and capital. Land includes all natural resources and is viewed as both the site of production and the source of raw materials. Labour or human resources consists of human effort provided in the creation of products, paid in wage. Capital consists of human-made goods or means of production (machinery, buildings, and other infrastructure) used in the production of other goods and services, paid in interest.\n\nIn biology and ecology a resource is defined as a substance that is required by a living organism for normal growth, maintenance, and reproduction (see biological resource). The main essential resources for animals are food, water, and territory. For plants key resources include sunlight, nutrients, water, and a place to grow. Resources, can be consumed by an organism and, as a result, become unavailable to other organisms. Competition for resources vary from complete symmetric (all individuals receive the same amount of resources, irrespective of their size) to perfectly size symmetric (all individuals exploit the same amount of resource per unit biomass) to absolutely size-asymmetric (the largest individuals exploit all the available resource). The degree of size asymmetry has major effects on the structure and diversity of ecological communities, e.g. in plant communities size-asymmetric competition for light has stronger effects on diversity compared with competition for soil resources.The degree of size asymmetry has major effects on the structure and diversity of ecological communities.\n\nThere are three fundamental differences between economic versus ecological views: 1) the economic resource definition is human-centered (anthropocentric) and the biological or ecological resource definition is nature-centered (biocentric or ecocentric); 2) the economic view includes desire along with necessity, whereas the biological view is about basic biological needs; and 3) economic systems are based on markets of currency exchanged for goods and services, whereas biological systems are based on natural processes of growth, maintenance, and reproduction.\n\nA computer resource is any physically or virtual component of limited availability within a computer or information management system. Computer resources include means for input, processing, output, communication, and storage.\n\nNatural resources are derived from the environment. Many natural resources are essential for human survival, while others are used for satisfying human desire. Conservation is the management of natural resources with the goal of sustainability. Natural resources may be further classified in different ways.\n\nResources can be categorized on the basis of origin:\n\nNatural resources are also categorized based on the stage of development:\n\nNatural resources can be categorized on the basis of renewability:\n\nDependent upon the speed and quantity of consumption, overconsumption can lead to depletion or total and everlasting destruction of a resource. Important examples are agricultural areas, fish and other animals, forests, healthy water and soil, cultivated and natural landscapes. Such conditionally renewable resources are sometimes classified as a third kind of resource, or as a subtype of renewable resources. Conditionally renewable resources are presently subject to excess human consumption and the only sustainable long term use of such resources is within the so-called zero ecological footprint, wherein human use less than the Earth's ecological capacity to regenerate.\n\nNatural resources are also categorized based on distribution:\n\nActual vs. potential natural resources are distinguished as follows:\n\nOn the basis of ownership, resources can be classified as individual, community, national, and international.\n\nIn economics, labour or human resources refers to the human effort in production of goods and rendering of services. Human resources can be defined in terms of skills, energy, talent, abilities, or knowledge.\n\nIn a project management context, human resources are those employees responsible for undertaking the activities defined in the project plan.\n\nIn social studies, capital refers to already-produced durable goods used in production of goods or services. In essence, capital refers to human-made resources created using knowledge and expertise based on utility or perceived value. Common examples of capital include buildings, machinery, railways, roads, and ships. As resources, capital goods may or may not be significantly consumed, though they may depreciate in the production process and they are typically of limited capacity or unavailable for use by others.\n\nWhereas, tangible resources such as equipment have actual physical existence, intangible resources such as corporate images, brands and patents, and other intellectual property exist in abstraction.\n\nGenerally the economic value of a resource is controlled by supply and demand. Some view this as a narrow perspective on resources because there are many intangibles that cannot be measured in money. Natural resources such as forests and mountains have aesthetic value. Resources also have an ethical value.\n\nTypically resources cannot be consumed in their original form, but rather through resource development they must be processed into more usable commodities and usable things. With increasing population, the demand for resources is increasing. There are marked differences in resource distribution and associated economic inequality between regions or countries, with developed countries using more natural resources than developing countries. Sustainable development is a pattern of resource use, that aims to meet human needs while preserving the environment. Sustainable development means that we should exploit our resources carefully to meet our present requirement without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. The practice of the three R's – reduce, reuse and recycle must be followed in order to save and extend the availability of resources.\n\nVarious problems relate to the usage of resources:\n\nVarious benefits can result from the wise usage of resources:\n\n\n \n", "id": "10368228", "title": "Resource"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8544676", "text": "Counterculture of the 1960s\n\nThe counterculture of the 1960s refers to an anti-establishment cultural phenomenon that developed first in the United Kingdom (UK) and the United States (US) and then spread throughout much of the Western world between the early 1960s and the mid-1970s, with London, New York City, and San Francisco being hotbeds of early countercultural activity. The aggregate movement gained momentum as the Civil Rights Movement continued to grow, and would later become revolutionary with the expansion of the U.S. government's extensive military intervention in Vietnam. As the 1960s progressed, widespread social tensions also developed concerning other issues, and tended to flow along generational lines regarding human sexuality, women's rights, traditional modes of authority, experimentation with psychoactive drugs, and differing interpretations of the American Dream. Many key movements related to these issues were born or advanced within the counterculture of the 1960s.\n\nAs the era unfolded, new cultural forms and a dynamic subculture which celebrated experimentation, modern incarnations of Bohemianism, and the rise of the hippie and other alternative lifestyles, emerged. This embracing of creativity is particularly notable in the works of British Invasion bands such as The Beatles, and filmmakers whose works became far less restricted by censorship. In addition to the trendsetting Beatles, many other creative artists, authors, and thinkers, within and across many disciplines, helped define the counterculture movement.\n\nSeveral factors distinguished the counterculture of the 1960s from the anti-authoritarian movements of previous eras. The post-World War II \"baby boom\" generated an unprecedented number of potentially disaffected young people as prospective participants in a rethinking of the direction of American and other democratic societies. Post-war affluence allowed many of the counterculture generation to move beyond a focus on the provision of the material necessities of life that had preoccupied their Depression-era parents. The era was also notable in that a significant portion of the array of behaviors and \"causes\" within the larger movement were quickly assimilated within mainstream society, particularly in the US, even though counterculture participants numbered in the clear minority within their respective national populations.\n\nThe counterculture era essentially commenced in earnest with the assassination of John F. Kennedy in November 1963. It became absorbed into the popular culture with the termination of US combat military involvement in Southeast Asia and the end of the draft in 1973, and ultimately with the resignation of President Richard Nixon in August 1974.\n\nThe Cold War between communist states and capitalist states involved espionage and preparation for war between powerful nations, along with political and military interference by powerful states in the internal affairs of less powerful nations. Poor outcomes from some of these activities set the stage for disillusionment with, and distrust of, post-war governments. Examples included harsh Soviet Union (USSR) responses to popular anti-communist uprisings, such as the 1956 Hungarian Revolution and Czechoslovakia's Prague Spring in 1968, and the botched US Bay of Pigs Invasion of Cuba in 1961. In the US, President Dwight D. Eisenhower's initial deception\nover the nature of the 1960 U-2 incident resulted in the government being caught in a blatant lie at the highest levels, and contributed to a backdrop of growing distrust of authority among many who came of age during the period. The Partial Test Ban Treaty divided the establishment within the US along political and military lines. Internal political disagreements concerning treaty obligations in Southeast Asia (SEATO), especially in Vietnam, and debate as to how other communist insurgencies should be challenged, also created a rift of dissent within the establishment. In the UK, the Profumo Affair also involved establishment leaders being caught in deception, leading to disillusionment and serving as a catalyst for liberal activism. The Cuban Missile Crisis, which brought the world to the brink of nuclear war in October 1962, was largely fomented by duplicitous speech and actions on the part of the Soviet Union. The assassination of US President John F. Kennedy in November 1963, and the attendant theories concerning the event, led to further diminished trust in government, including among younger people.\n\nMany social issues fueled the growth of the larger counterculture movement. One was a nonviolent movement in the United States seeking to resolve constitutional civil rights illegalities, especially regarding general racial segregation, longstanding disfranchisement of blacks in the South by white-dominated state government, and ongoing racial discrimination in jobs, housing, and access to public places in both the North and the South.\nOn college and university campuses, student activists fought for the right to exercise their basic constitutional rights, especially freedom of speech and freedom of assembly.\n\nMany counterculture activists became aware of the plight of the poor, and community organizers fought for the funding of anti-poverty programs, particularly in the South and within inner city areas in the United States.\n\nEnvironmentalism grew from a greater understanding of the ongoing damage caused by industrialization, resultant pollution, and the misguided use of chemicals such as pesticides in well-meaning efforts to improve the quality of life for the rapidly growing population. Authors such as Rachel Carson played key roles in developing a new awareness among the global population of the fragility of our planet, despite resistance from elements of the establishment in many countries.\n\nThe need to address minority rights of women, gay people, the handicapped, and many other neglected constituencies within the larger population came to the forefront as an increasing number of primarily younger people broke free from the constraints of 1950s orthodoxy and struggled to create a more inclusive and tolerant social landscape.\n\nThe availability of new and more effective forms of birth control was a key underpinning of the sexual revolution. The notion of \"recreational sex\" without the threat of unwanted pregnancy radically changed the social dynamic and permitted both women and men much greater freedom in the selection of sexual lifestyles outside the confines of traditional marriage. With this change in attitude, by the 1990s the ratio of children born out of wedlock rose from 5% to 25% for Whites and from 25% to 66% for African-Americans.\n\nFor those born after World War II, the emergence of television as a source of entertainment and information—as well as the associated massive expansion of consumerism afforded by post-war affluence and encouraged by TV advertising—were key components in creating disillusionment for some younger people and in the formulation of new social behaviours, even as ad agencies heavily courted the \"hip\" youth market. In the US, nearly real-time TV news coverage of the civil rights era's Birmingham Campaign, the \"Bloody Sunday\" event of the Selma to Montgomery marches, and graphic news footage from Vietnam brought horrifying, moving images of the bloody reality of armed conflict into living rooms for the first time.\n\nThe breakdown of enforcement of the US Hays Code concerning censorship in motion picture production, the use of new forms of artistic expression in European and Asian cinema, and the advent of modern production values heralded a new era of art-house, pornographic, and mainstream film production, distribution, and exhibition. The end of censorship resulted in a complete reformation of the western film industry. With new-found artistic freedom, a generation of exceptionally talented New Wave film makers working across all genres brought realistic depictions of previously prohibited subject matter to neighborhood theater screens for the first time, even as Hollywood film studios were still considered a part of the establishment by some elements of the counterculture.\n\nBy the later 1960s, previously under-regarded FM radio replaced AM radio as the focal point for the ongoing explosion of rock and roll music, and became the nexus of youth-oriented news and advertising for the counterculture generation.\n\nCommunes, collectives, and intentional communities regained popularity during this era. Early communities, such as the Hog Farm, Quarry Hill, and Drop City\nin the US were established as straightforward agrarian attempts to return to the land and live free of interference from outside influences. As the era progressed, many people established and populated new communities in response to not only disillusionment with standard community forms, but also dissatisfaction with certain elements of the counterculture itself. Some of these self-sustaining communities have been credited with the birth and propagation of the international Green Movement.\n\nThe emergence of an interest in expanded spiritual consciousness, yoga, occult practices and increased human potential helped to shift views on organized religion during the era. In 1957, 69% of US residents polled by Gallup said religion was increasing in influence. By the late 1960s, polls indicated less than 20% still held that belief.\n\nThe \"Generation Gap\", or the inevitable perceived divide in worldview between the old and young, was perhaps never greater than during the counterculture era. A large measure of the generational chasm of the 1960s and early 1970s was born of rapidly evolving fashion and hairstyle trends that were readily adopted by the young, but often misunderstood and ridiculed by the old. These included the wearing of very long hair by men, the wearing of natural or \"Afro\" hairstyles by Blacks, the donning of revealing clothing by women in public, and the mainstreaming of the psychedelic clothing and regalia of the short-lived hippie culture. Ultimately, practical and comfortable casual apparel, namely updated forms of T-shirts (often tie-dyed, or emblazoned with political or advertising statements), and Levi Strauss-branded blue denim jeans became the enduring uniform of the generation. The fashion dominance of the counterculture effectively ended with the rise of the Disco and Punk Rock eras in the later 1970s, even as the global popularity of T-shirts, denim jeans, and casual clothing in general have continued to grow.\n\nIn the western world, the ongoing criminal legal status of the recreational drug industry was instrumental in the formation of an anti-establishment social dynamic by some of those coming of age during the counterculture era. The explosion of marijuana use during the era, in large part by students on fast-expanding college campuses, created an attendant need for increasing numbers of people to conduct their personal affairs in secret in the procurement and use of banned substances. The classification of marijuana as a narcotic, and the attachment of severe criminal penalties for its use, drove the act of smoking marijuana, and experimentation with substances in general, deep underground. Many began to live largely clandestine lives because of their choice to use such drugs and substances, fearing retribution from their governments.\n\nThe confrontations between college students (and other activists) and law enforcement officials became one of the hallmarks of the era. Many younger people began to show deep distrust of police, and terms such as \"fuzz\" and \"pig\" as derogatory epithets for police reappeared, and became key words within the counterculture lexicon. The distrust of police was based not only on fear of police brutality during political protests, but also on generalized police corruption - especially police manufacture of false evidence, and outright entrapment, in drug cases. In the US, the social tension between elements of the counterculture and law enforcement reached the breaking point in many notable cases, including: the Columbia University protests of 1968 in New York City, the 1968 Democratic National Convention protests in Chicago, the arrest and imprisonment of John Sinclair in Ann Arbor, Michigan, and the Kent State shootings at Kent State University in Kent, Ohio, where National Guardsman acted as surrogates for police. Police malfeasance was also an ongoing issue in the UK during the era.\n\nThe Vietnam War, and the protracted national divide between supporters and opponents of the war, were arguably the most important factors contributing to the rise of the larger counterculture movement.\n\nThe widely accepted assertion that anti-war opinion was held only among the young is a myth, but enormous war protests consisting of thousands of mostly younger people in every major US city, and elsewhere across the Western world, effectively united millions against the war, and against the war policy that prevailed under five US congresses and during two presidential administrations.\n\nThe counterculture movement took hold in Western Europe, with London, Amsterdam, Paris, Rome and West Berlin rivaling San Francisco and New York as counterculture centers.\n\nThe UK Underground was a movement linked to the growing subculture in the US and associated with the hippie phenomenon, generating its own magazines and newspapers, fashion, music groups, and clubs. Underground figure Barry Miles said, \"The underground was a catch-all sobriquet for a community of like-minded anti-establishment, anti-war, pro-rock'n'roll individuals, most of whom had a common interest in recreational drugs. They saw peace, exploring a widened area of consciousness, love and sexual experimentation as more worthy of their attention than entering the rat race. The straight, consumerist lifestyle was not to their liking, but they did not object to others living it. But at that time the middle classes still felt they had the right to impose their values on everyone else, which resulted in conflict.\"\n\nIn the Netherlands, Provo was a counterculture movement that focused on \"provoking violent responses from authorities using non-violent bait.\"\n\nIn France, the General Strike centered in Paris in May 1968 united French students, and nearly toppled the government.\n\nKommune 1 or K1 was a commune in West Germany, and was known for its bizarre staged events that fluctuated between satire and provocation. These events served as inspiration for the \"Sponti\" movement and other leftist groups. In the late summer of 1968, the commune moved into a deserted factory on Stephanstraße in order to reorient. This second phase of Kommune 1 was characterized by sex, music and drugs. Soon, the commune was receiving visitors from all over the world, including Jimi Hendrix.\n\n\"Mánička\" is a Czech term used for young people with long hair, usually males, in Czechoslovakia through the 1960s and 1970s. Long hair for males during this time was considered an expression of political and social attitudes in communist Czechoslovakia. From the mid-1960s, the long-haired and \"untidy\" persons (so called \"máničky\" or \"vlasatci\" (in English: Mops) were banned from entering pubs, cinema halls, theatres and using public transportation in several Czech cities and towns. In 1964, the public transportation regulations in Most and Litvínov excluded long-haired \"máničky\" as displeasure-evoking persons. Two years later, the municipal council in Poděbrady banned \"máničky\" from entering cultural institutions in the town. In August 1966, \"Rudé právo\" informed that \"máničky\" in Prague were banned from visiting restaurants of the I. and II. price category.\n\nIn 1966, during a big campaign coordinated by the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia, around 4,000 young males were forced to cut their hair, often in the cells with the assistance of the state police. On 19 August 1966, during a \"safety intervention\" organized by the state police, 140 long-haired people were arrested. As a response, the \"community of long-haired\" organized a protest in Prague. More than 100 people cheered slogans such as \"Give us back our hair!\" or \"Away with hairdressers!\". The state police arrested the organizers and several participants of the meeting. Some of them were given prison sentences. According to the newspaper \"Mladá fronta Dnes\", the Czechoslovak Ministry of Interior in 1966 even compiled a detailed map of the frequency of occurrence of long-haired males in Czechoslovakia. In August 1969, during the first anniversary of the Soviet occupation of Czechoslovakia, the long-haired youth were one of the most active voices in the state protesting against the occupation. Youth protesters have been labeled as \"vagabonds\" and \"slackers\" by the official normalized press.\n\n\"Oz\" magazine was first published as a satirical humour magazine between 1963 and 1969 in Sydney, Australia, and, in its second and better known incarnation, became a \"psychedelic hippy\" magazine from 1967 to 1973 in London. Strongly identified as part of the underground press, it was the subject of two celebrated obscenity trials, one in Australia in 1964 and the other in the United Kingdom in 1971.\n\nIn Mexico, rock music was tied into the youth revolt of the 1960s. Mexico City, as well as northern cities such as Monterrey, Nuevo Laredo, Ciudad Juárez, and Tijuana, were exposed to US music. Many Mexican rock stars became involved in the counterculture. The three-day Festival Rock y Ruedas de Avándaro, held in 1971, was organized in the valley of Avándaro near the city of Toluca, a town neighboring Mexico City, and became known as \"The Mexican Woodstock\". Nudity, drug use, and the presence of the US flag scandalized conservative Mexican society to such an extent that the government clamped down on rock and roll performances for the rest of the decade. The festival, marketed as proof of Mexico's modernization, was never expected to attract the masses it did, and the government had to evacuate stranded attendees en masse at the end. This occurred during the era of President Luis Echeverría, an extremely repressive era in Mexican history. Anything that could be connected to the counterculture or student protests was prohibited from being broadcast on public airwaves, with the government fearing a repeat of the student protests of 1968. Few bands survived the prohibition; though the ones that did, like Three Souls in My Mind (now El Tri), remained popular due in part to their adoption of Spanish for their lyrics, but mostly as a result of a dedicated underground following. While Mexican rock groups were eventually able to perform publicly by the mid-1980s, the ban prohibiting tours of Mexico by foreign acts lasted until 1989.\n\nThe Cordobazo was a civil uprising in the city of Córdoba, Argentina, in the end of May 1969, during the military dictatorship of General Juan Carlos Onganía, which occurred a few days after the \"Rosariazo\", and a year after the French May '68. Contrary to previous protests, the Cordobazo did not correspond to previous struggles, headed by Marxist workers' leaders, but associated students and workers in the same struggle against the military government.\n\nThe Civil Rights Movement, a key element of the larger counterculture movement, involved the use of applied nonviolence to assure that equal rights guaranteed under the US Constitution would apply to all citizens. Many states illegally denied many of these rights to African-Americans, and this was successfully addressed in the early and mid-1960s in several major nonviolent movements.\n\nMuch of the 1960s counterculture originated on college campuses. The 1964 Free Speech Movement at the University of California, Berkeley, which had its roots in the Civil Rights Movement of the southern United States, was one early example. At Berkeley a group of students began to identify themselves as having interests as a class that were at odds with the interests and practices of the University and its corporate sponsors. Other rebellious young people, who were not students, also contributed to the Free Speech Movement.\n\nThe \"New Left\" is a term used in different countries to describe left-wing movements that occurred in the 1960s and 1970s in the Western world. They differed from earlier leftist movements that had been more oriented towards labour activism, and instead adopted social activism. The US \"New Left\" is associated with college campus mass protests and radical leftist movements. The British \"New Left\" was an intellectually driven movement which attempted to correct the perceived errors of \"Old Left\" parties in the post-World War II period. The movements began to wind down in the 1970s, when activists either committed themselves to party projects, developed social justice organizations, moved into identity politics or alternative lifestyles, or became politically inactive.\n\nThe emergence of the New Left in the 1950s and 1960s led to a revival of interest in libertarian socialism. The New Left's critique of the Old Left's authoritarianism was associated with a strong interest in personal liberty, autonomy (see the thinking of Cornelius Castoriadis) and led to a rediscovery of older socialist traditions, such as left communism, council communism, and the Industrial Workers of the World. The New Left also led to a revival of anarchism. Journals like \"Radical America\" and \"Black Mask\" in America, \"Solidarity\", \"Big Flame\" and \"Democracy & Nature\", succeeded by \"The International Journal of Inclusive Democracy\", in the UK, introduced a range of left libertarian ideas to a new generation. Social ecology, autonomism and, more recently, participatory economics (parecon), and Inclusive Democracy emerged from this.\n\nA surge of popular interest in anarchism occurred in western nations during the 1960s and 1970s. Anarchism was influential in the counterculture of the 1960s and anarchists actively participated in the late 60s students and workers revolts. During the IX Congress of the Italian Anarchist Federation in Carrara in 1965, a group decided to split off from this organization and created the \"Gruppi di Iniziativa Anarchica\". In the 70s, it was mostly composed of \"veteran individualist anarchists with a pacifism orientation, naturism, etc, ...\". In 1968 in Carrara, Italy the International of Anarchist Federations was founded during an international anarchist conference held there in 1968 by the three existing European federations of France, the Italian and the Iberian Anarchist Federation as well as the Bulgarian federation in French exile. During the events of May 68 the anarchist groups active in France were Fédération anarchiste, Mouvement communiste libertaire, Union fédérale des anarchistes, Alliance ouvrière anarchiste, Union des groupes anarchistes communistes, Noir et Rouge, Confédération nationale du travail, Union anarcho-syndicaliste, Organisation révolutionnaire anarchiste, \"Cahiers socialistes libertaires\", \"À contre-courant\", \"La Révolution prolétarienne\", and the publications close to Émile Armand.\n\nThe New Left in the United States also included anarchist, countercultural and hippie-related radical groups such as the Yippies who were led by Abbie Hoffman, The Diggers and Up Against the Wall Motherfuckers. By late 1966, the Diggers opened free stores which simply gave away their stock, provided free food, distributed free drugs, gave away money, organized free music concerts, and performed works of political art. The Diggers took their name from the original English Diggers led by Gerrard Winstanley and sought to create a mini-society free of money and capitalism. On the other hand, the Yippies employed theatrical gestures, such as advancing a pig (\"Pigasus the Immortal\") as a candidate for President in 1968, to mock the social status quo. They have been described as a highly theatrical, anti-authoritarian and anarchist youth movement of \"symbolic politics\". Since they were well known for street theater and politically themed pranks, many of the \"old school\" political left either ignored or denounced them. According to ABC News, \"The group was known for street theater pranks and was once referred to as the 'Groucho Marxists'.\"\n\nIn Trafalgar Square, London in 1958, in an act of civil disobedience, 60,000-100,000 protesters made up of students and pacifists converged in what was to become the \"ban the Bomb\" demonstrations.\n\nOpposition to the Vietnam War began in 1964 on United States college campuses. Student activism became a dominant theme among the baby boomers, growing to include many other demographic groups. Exemptions and deferments for the middle and upper classes resulted in the induction of a disproportionate number of poor, working-class, and minority registrants. Countercultural books such as MacBird by Barbara Garson and much of the counterculture music encouraged a spirit of non-conformism and anti-establishmentarianism. By 1968, the year after a large march to the United Nations in New York City and a large protest at the Pentagon were undertaken, a majority of people in the country opposed the war.\n\nThe application of nuclear technology, both as a source of energy and as an instrument of war, has been controversial.\n\nScientists and diplomats have debated the nuclear weapons policy since before the atomic bombing of Hiroshima in 1945. The public became concerned about nuclear weapons testing from about 1954, following extensive nuclear testing in the Pacific. In 1961, at the height of the Cold War, about 50,000 women brought together by Women Strike for Peace marched in 60 cities in the United States to demonstrate against nuclear weapons. In 1963, many countries ratified the Partial Test Ban Treaty which prohibited atmospheric nuclear testing.\n\nSome local opposition to nuclear power emerged in the early 1960s, and in the late 1960s some members of the scientific community began to express their concerns. In the early 1970s, there were large protests about a proposed nuclear power plant in Wyhl, Germany. The project was cancelled in 1975 and anti-nuclear success at Wyhl inspired opposition to nuclear power in other parts of Europe and North America. Nuclear power became an issue of major public protest in the 1970s.\n\nThe role of women as full-time homemakers in industrial society was challenged in 1963, when US feminist Betty Friedan published \"The Feminine Mystique\", giving momentum to the women's movement and influencing what many called Second-wave feminism. Other activists, such as Gloria Steinem and Angela Davis, either organized, influenced, or educated many of a younger generation of women to endorse and expand feminist thought. Feminism gained further currency within the protest movements of the late 1960s, as women in movements such as Students for a Democratic Society rebelled against the \"support\" role they had been consigned to within the male-dominated New Left, as well as against manifestations and statements of sexism within some radical groups. The 1970 pamphlet \"Women and Their Bodies\", soon expanded into the 1971 book \"Our Bodies, Ourselves\", was particularly influential in bringing about the new feminist consciousness.\n\nThe 1960s counterculture embraced a back-to-the-land ethic, and communes of the era often relocated to the country from cities. Influential books of the 1960s included Rachel Carson's \"Silent Spring\" and Paul Ehrlich's \"The Population Bomb\". Counterculture environmentalists were quick to grasp the implications of Ehrlich's writings on overpopulation, the Hubbert \"peak oil\" prediction, and more general concerns over pollution, litter, the environmental effects of the Vietnam War, automobile-dependent lifestyles, and nuclear energy. More broadly they saw that the dilemmas of energy and resource allocation would have implications for geo-politics, lifestyle, environment, and other dimensions of modern life. The \"back to nature\" theme was already prevalent in the counterculture by the time of the 1969 Woodstock festival, while the first Earth Day in 1970 was significant in bringing environmental concerns to the forefront of youth culture. At the start of the 1970s, counterculture-oriented publications like the \"Whole Earth Catalog\" and \"The Mother Earth News\" were popular, out of which emerged a back to the land movement. The 1960s and early 1970s counterculture were early adopters of practices such as recycling and organic farming long before they became mainstream. The counterculture interest in ecology progressed well into the 1970s: particularly influential were New Left eco-anarchist Murray Bookchin, Jerry Mander's criticism of the effects of television on society, Ernest Callenbach's novel \"Ecotopia\", Edward Abbey's fiction and non-fiction writings, and E.F. Schumacher's economics book \"Small is Beautiful\".\n\nThe Stonewall riots were a series of spontaneous, violent demonstrations against a police raid that took place in the early morning hours of June 28, 1969, at the Stonewall Inn, a gay bar in the Greenwich Village neighborhood of New York City. This is frequently cited as the first instance in US history when people in the gay community fought back against a government-sponsored system that persecuted sexual minorities, and became the defining event that marked the start of the Gay rights movement in the United States and around the world.\n\nAfter the January 14, 1967 Human Be-In in San Francisco organized by artist Michael Bowen, the media's attention on culture was fully activated. In 1967 Scott McKenzie's rendition of the song \"San Francisco (Be Sure to Wear Flowers in Your Hair)\" brought as many as 100,000 young people from all over the world to celebrate San Francisco's \"Summer of Love.\" While the song had originally been written by John Phillips of The Mamas & the Papas to promote the June 1967 Monterey Pop Festival, it became an instant hit worldwide (#4 in the United States, #1 in Europe) and quickly transcended its original purpose.\n\nSan Francisco's flower children, also called \"hippies\" by local newspaper columnist Herb Caen, adopted new styles of dress, experimented with psychedelic drugs, lived communally and developed a vibrant music scene. When people returned home from \"The Summer of Love\" these styles and behaviors spread quickly from San Francisco and Berkeley to many US and Canadian cities and European capitals. Some hippies formed communes to live as far outside of the established system as possible. This aspect of the counterculture rejected active political engagement with the mainstream and, following the dictate of Timothy Leary to \"Turn on, tune in, drop out\", hoped to change society by dropping out of it. Looking back on his own life (as a Harvard professor) prior to 1960, Leary interpreted it to have been that of \"an anonymous institutional employee who drove to work each morning in a long line of commuter cars and drove home each night and drank martinis ... like several million middle-class, liberal, intellectual robots.\"\n\nAs members of the hippie movement grew older and moderated their lives and their views, and especially after US involvement in the Vietnam War ended in the mid-1970s, the counterculture was largely absorbed by the mainstream, leaving a lasting impact on philosophy, morality, music, art, alternative health and diet, lifestyle and fashion.\n\nIn addition to a new style of clothing, philosophy, art, music and various views on anti-war, and anti-establishment, some hippies decided to turn away from modern society and re-settle on ranches, or communes. The very first of communes in the United States was a seven-acre land in Southern Colorado, named Drop City. According to Timothy Miller, \nDrop City brought together most of the themes that had been developing in other recent communities-anarchy, pacifism, sexual freedom, rural isolation, interest in drugs, art-and wrapped them flamboyantly into a commune not quite like any that had gone before\n\nMany of the inhabitants practiced acts like reusing trash and recycled materials to build Geodesic domes for shelter and other various purposes; using various drugs like marijuana and LSD, and creating various pieces of Drop Art. After the initial success of Drop City, visitors would take the idea of communes and spread them. Another commune called \"The Ranch\" was very similar to the culture of Drop City, as well as new concepts like giving children of the commune extensive freedoms known as \"children's rights\".\n\nDuring the 1960s, this second group of casual lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) users evolved and expanded into a subculture that extolled the mystical and religious symbolism often engendered by the drug's powerful effects, and advocated its use as a method of raising consciousness. The personalities associated with the subculture, gurus such as Timothy Leary and psychedelic rock musicians such as the Grateful Dead, Pink Floyd, Jimi Hendrix, The Byrds, The 13th Floor Elevators, Ultimate Spinach, Janis Joplin, Crosby, Stills & Nash, The Doors, Blue Cheer, The Chambers Brothers, Country Joe and the Fish, Big Brother and the Holding Company, Jefferson Airplane and The Beatles, soon attracted a great deal of publicity, generating further interest in LSD.\n\nThe popularization of LSD outside of the medical world was hastened when individuals such as Ken Kesey participated in drug trials and liked what they saw. Tom Wolfe wrote a widely read account of these early days of LSD's entrance into the non-academic world in his book \"The Electric Kool Aid Acid Test\", which documented the cross-country, acid-fueled voyage of Ken Kesey and the Merry Pranksters on the psychedelic bus \"Furthur\" and the Pranksters' later \"Acid Test\" LSD parties. In 1965, Sandoz laboratories stopped its still legal shipments of LSD to the United States for research and psychiatric use, after a request from the US government concerned about its use. By April 1966, LSD use had become so widespread that \"Time Magazine\" warned about its dangers. In December 1966, the exploitation film \"Hallucination Generation\" was released. This was followed by \"The Trip\" in 1967 and \"Psych-Out\" in 1968.\n\nAs most research on psychedelics began in the 1940s and 50s, heavy experimentation made its effect in the 1960s during this era of change and movement. Researchers were gaining acknowledgment and popularity with their promotion of psychedelia. This really anchored the change that counterculture instigators and followers began. Most research was conducted at top collegiate institutes, such as Harvard University.\n\nTimothy Leary and his Harvard research team had hopes for potential changes in society. Their research began with mushrooms (psilocybin) and was called the Harvard Mushroom Project. The subjects for this research were convicts at the Concord Prison. After the research sessions, Leary did a follow-up. He found that \"75% of the turned on prisoners who were released had stayed out of jail.\" He believed he had solved the nation's crime problem. But with many officials skeptical, this breakthrough was not promoted.\n\nBecause of the personal experiences with these drugs Leary and his many outstanding colleagues, Aldous Huxley (\"The Doors of Perception\") and Alan Watts (\"The Joyous Cosmology\") believed that these were the mechanisms that could bring peace to not only the nation but the world. As their research continued the media followed them and published their work and documented their behavior, the trend of this counterculture drug experimentation began.\n\nLeary made attempts to bring more organized awareness to people interested in the study of psychedelics. He confronted the Senate committee in Washington and recommended for colleges to authorize the conduction of laboratory courses in psychedelics. He noted that these courses would \"end the indiscriminate use of LSD and would be the most popular and productive courses ever offered\". Although these men were seeking an ultimate enlightenment, reality eventually proved that the potential they thought was there could not be reached, at least in this time. The change they sought for the world had not been permitted by the political systems of all the nations these men pursued their research in. Ram Dass states, \"Tim and I actually had a chart on the wall about how soon everyone would be enlightened... We found out that real change is harder. We downplayed the fact that the psychedelic experience isn't for everyone.\"\n\nLeary and his team's research got shut down at Harvard and everywhere they relocated around the globe. Their outlawish behavior and aggressive approach with these drugs did not settle well with the law. Officials did not agree with this chaotic promotion of peace.\n\nResearch with psychedelic drugs and those who conducted it was a radical understanding for the vast majority of the world. However, it did create a change. A ripple of curiosity was created as a result and the wave is continuing to swell.\n\nKen Kesey and his Merry Pranksters helped shape the developing character of the 1960s counterculture when they embarked on a cross-country voyage during the summer of 1964 in a psychedelic school bus named \"Furthur\". Beginning in 1959, Kesey had volunteered as a research subject for medical trials financed by the CIA's \"MK ULTRA\" project. These trials tested the effects of LSD, psilocybin, mescaline, and other psychedelic drugs. After the medical trials, Kesey continued experimenting on his own, and involved many close friends; collectively they became known as \"The Merry Pranksters\". The Pranksters visited Harvard LSD proponent Timothy Leary at his Millbrook, New York retreat, and experimentation with LSD and other psychedelic drugs, primarily as a means for internal reflection and personal growth, became a constant during the Prankster trip.\n\nThe Pranksters created a direct link between the 1950s Beat Generation and the 1960s psychedelic scene; the bus was driven by Beat icon Neal Cassady, Beat poet Allen Ginsberg was on board for a time, and they dropped in on Cassady's friend, Beat author Jack Kerouac - though Kerouac declined to participate in the Prankster scene. After the Pranksters returned to California, they popularized the use of LSD at so-called \"Acid Tests\", which initially were held at Kesey's home in La Honda, California, and then at many other West Coast venues.\n\nExperimentation with LSD, peyote, psilocybin mushrooms, MDA, marijuana, and other psychedelic drugs became a major component of 1960s counterculture, influencing philosophy, art, music and styles of dress. Jim DeRogatis wrote that peyote, a small cactus containing the psychedelic alkaloid mescaline, was widely available in Austin, Texas, a countercultural hub in the early 1960s.\n\nThe sexual revolution (also known as a time of \"sexual liberation\") was a social movement that challenged traditional codes of behavior related to sexuality and interpersonal relationships throughout the Western world from the 1960s to the 1980s. Sexual liberation included increased acceptance of sex outside of traditional heterosexual, monogamous relationships (primarily marriage). Contraception and the pill, public nudity, the normalization of premarital sex, homosexuality and alternative forms of sexuality, and the legalization of abortion all followed.\n\nUnderground newspapers sprang up in most cities and college towns, serving to define and communicate the range of phenomena that defined the counterculture: radical political opposition to \"The Establishment\", colorful experimental (and often explicitly drug-influenced) approaches to art, music and cinema, and uninhibited indulgence in sex and drugs as a symbol of freedom. The papers also often included comic strips, from which the underground comix were an outgrowth.\n\nAs numbers of young people became alienated from social norms, they resisted and looked for alternatives. The forms of escape and resistance manifest in many ways including social activism, alternative lifestyles, dress, music and alternative recreational activities, including that of throwing a Frisbee. From hippies tossing the Frisbee at festivals and concerts came today's popular disc sports. Disc sports such as disc freestyle, double disc court, disc guts, Ultimate and disc golf became this sport's first events.\n\nThe Situationist International was a restricted group of international revolutionaries founded in 1957, and which had its peak in its influence on the unprecedented general wildcat strikes of May 1968 in France. With their ideas rooted in Marxism and the 20th-century European artistic avant-gardes, they advocated experiences of life being alternative to those admitted by the capitalist order, for the fulfillment of human primitive desires and the pursuing of a superior passional quality. For this purpose they suggested and experimented with the \"construction of situations\", namely the setting up of environments favorable for the fulfillment of such desires. Using methods drawn from the arts, they developed a series of experimental fields of study for the construction of such situations, like unitary urbanism and psychogeography. They fought against the main obstacle on the fulfillment of such superior passional living, identified by them in advanced capitalism. Their theoretical work peaked on the highly influential book \"The Society of the Spectacle\" by Guy Debord. Debord argued in 1967 that spectacular features like mass media and advertising have a central role in an advanced capitalist society, which is to show a fake reality in order to mask the real capitalist degradation of human life. Raoul Vaneigem wrote \"The Revolution of Everyday Life\" which takes the field of \"everyday life\" as the ground upon which communication and participation can occur, or, as is more commonly the case, be perverted and abstracted into pseudo-forms.\n\nFluxus (a name taken from a Latin word meaning \"to flow\") is an international network of artists, composers and designers noted for blending different artistic media and disciplines in the 1960s. They have been active in Neo-Dada noise music, visual art, literature, urban planning, architecture, and design. Fluxus is often described as intermedia, a term coined by Fluxus artist Dick Higgins in a famous 1966 essay. Fluxus encouraged a \"do-it-yourself\" aesthetic, and valued simplicity over complexity. Like Dada before it, Fluxus included a strong current of anti-commercialism and an anti-art sensibility, disparaging the conventional market-driven art world in favor of an artist-centered creative practice. As Fluxus artist Robert Filliou wrote, however, Fluxus differed from Dada in its richer set of aspirations, and the positive social and communitarian aspirations of Fluxus far outweighed the anti-art tendency that also marked the group.\n\nIn the 1960s, the Dada-influenced art group Black Mask declared that revolutionary art should be \"an integral part of life, as in primitive society, and not an appendage to wealth.\" Black Mask disrupted cultural events in New York by giving made up flyers of art events to the homeless with the lure of free drinks. After, the Motherfuckers grew out of a combination of Black Mask and another group called Angry Arts. Up Against the Wall Motherfuckers (often referred to as simply \"the Motherfuckers\", or UAW/MF) was an anarchist affinity group based in New York City.\n\nDuring the early 1960s, Britain's new wave of musicians gained popularity and fame in the United States. Artists such as the Beatles paved the way for their compatriots to enter the US market. The Beatles themselves were influenced by many artists, among them American singer-songwriter Bob Dylan, who was a lyrical inspiration as well as their introduction to marijuana. Dylan's early career as a protest singer had been inspired by artists like Pete Seeger and his hero Woody Guthrie. Other folksingers, like Joan Baez and Peter, Paul and Mary, took the songs of the era to new audiences and public recognition.\n\nThe music of the 1960s moved towards an electric, psychedelic version of rock, thanks largely to Bob Dylan's decision to play an electric guitar at the 1965 Newport Folk Festival. The newly popularized electric sound of rock was then built upon and molded into psychedelic rock by artists like The 13th Floor Elevators and British bands Pink Floyd and the Beatles. The Beach Boys' 1966 album \"Pet Sounds\" also paved the way for later hippie acts, with Brian Wilson's writing interpreted as a \"plea for love and understanding.\" \"Pet Sounds\" served as a major source of inspiration for other contemporary acts, most notably directly inspiring the Beatles' \"Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band\". The single \"Good Vibrations\" soared to number one globally, completely changing the perception of what a record could be. It was during this period that the highly anticipated album \"Smile\" was to be released. However, the project collapsed and The Beach Boys released a downgraded version called \"Smiley Smile\", which failed to make a big commercial impact but was also highly influential, most notably on The Who's Pete Townshend.\n\nThe Beatles went on to become the most prominent commercial exponents of the \"psychedelic revolution\" (e.g., \"Revolver\", \"Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band\" and \"Magical Mystery Tour\") in the late 1960s. In the United States, bands that exemplified the counterculture were becoming huge commercial and mainstream successes. These included The Mamas & the Papas (\"If You Can Believe Your Eyes and Ears\"), Big Brother and the Holding Company (\"Cheap Thrills\"), Jimi Hendrix (\"Are You Experienced\"), Jefferson Airplane (\"Surrealistic Pillow\"), The Doors (\"The Doors\") and Sly and the Family Stone (\"Stand!\"). Bands and other musicians, such as the Grateful Dead, Neil Young (Canada), David Peel, Phil Ochs, The Fugs, Quicksilver Messenger Service, John Sebastian, Melanie, The Velvet Underground, Frank Zappa, Captain Beefheart, Santana, CSNY, Shocking Blue, Country Joe and the Fish, and The Holy Modal Rounders were considered key to the counterculture movement.\n\nWhile the hippie scene was born in California, an edgier scene emerged in New York City that put more emphasis on avant-garde and art music. Bands such as The Velvet Underground came out of this underground music scene, which was predominantly centered at Andy Warhol's legendary Factory. The Velvet Underground supplied the music for the Exploding Plastic Inevitable, a series of multimedia events staged by Warhol and his collaborators in 1966 and 1967. The Velvet Underground's lyrics were considered risqué for the era, since they discussed sexual fetishism, transgender identities, and the use of hard drugs associated with Warhol's Factory and its superstars.\nDetroit's MC5 also came out of the underground rock music scene of the late 1960s. They introduced a more aggressive evolution of garage rock which was often fused with sociopolitical and countercultural lyrics of the era, such as in the song \"Motor City Is Burning\" (a John Lee Hooker cover adapting the story of the Detroit Race Riot of 1943 to the Detroit riot of 1967). MC5 had ties to radical leftist organizations such as \"Up Against the Wall Motherfuckers\" and John Sinclair's White Panther Party, and MC5 performed a lengthy set before the 1968 Democratic National Convention in Chicago, where an infamous riot subsequently broke out between police and students protesting the Vietnam War and the recent assassinations of Martin Luther King, Jr. and Robert Kennedy. MC5, The Stooges and the aforementioned Velvet Underground, are now seen as an influence on the protopunk sound that would lead to punk rock and heavy metal music in the late 1970s.\n\nAnother hotbed of the 1960s counterculture was Austin, Texas, with two of the era's legendary music venues-the Vulcan Gas Company and the Armadillo World Headquarters-and musical talent like Janis Joplin, the 13th Floor Elevators, Shiva's Headband, the Conqueroo, and, later, Stevie Ray Vaughan. Austin was also home to a large New Left activist movement, one of the earliest underground papers, The Rag, and cutting edge graphic artists like Fabulous Furry Freak Brothers creator Gilbert Shelton, underground comix pioneer Jack Jackson (Jaxon), and surrealist armadillo artist Jim Franklin.\n\nThe 1960s was also an era of rock festivals, which played an important role in spreading the counterculture across the US. The Monterey Pop Festival, which launched Jimi Hendrix's career in the US, was one of the first of these festivals. Britain's 1968–1970 Isle of Wight Festivals drew big names such as The Who, The Doors, Joni Mitchell, Hendrix, Dylan, and others. The 1969 Woodstock Festival in New York state became a symbol of the movement, although the 1970 Isle of Wight Festival drew a larger crowd. Some believe the era came to an abrupt end with the infamous Altamont Free Concert held by The Rolling Stones, in which heavy-handed security from the Hells Angels resulted in the stabbing of an audience member, apparently in self-defense, as the show descended into chaos.\nAs the psychedelic revolution progressed, lyrics grew more complex, (such as Jefferson Airplane's \"White Rabbit\"). Long-playing albums enabled artists to make more in-depth statements than could be made in just a single song (such as the Mothers of Invention's satirical \"Freak Out!\"). Even the rules governing single songs were stretched, and singles lasting longer than three minutes emerged, such as Dylan's \"Like a Rolling Stone\", Arlo Guthrie's \"Alice's Restaurant\", and Iron Butterfly's 17-minute-long \"In-A-Gadda-Da-Vida.\".\n\nThe 1960s saw the protest song gain a sense of political self-importance, with Phil Ochs's \"I Ain't Marching Anymore\" and Country Joe and the Fish's \"I-Feel-Like-I'm-Fixin'-to-Die-Rag\" among the many anti-war anthems that were important to the era.\n\nFree jazz is an approach to jazz music that was first developed in the 1950s and 1960s. Though the music produced by free jazz composers varied widely, the common feature was a dissatisfaction with the limitations of bebop, hard bop, and modal jazz, which had developed in the 1940s and 1950s. Each in their own way, free jazz musicians attempted to alter, extend, or break down the conventions of jazz, often by discarding hitherto invariable features of jazz, such as fixed chord changes or tempos. While usually considered experimental and avant-garde, free jazz has also oppositely been conceived as an attempt to return jazz to its \"primitive\", often religious roots, and emphasis on collective improvisation. Free jazz is strongly associated with the 1950s innovations of Ornette Coleman and Cecil Taylor and the later works of saxophonist John Coltrane. Other important pioneers included Charles Mingus, Eric Dolphy, Albert Ayler, Archie Shepp, Joe Maneri and Sun Ra. Although today \"free jazz\" is the generally used term, many other terms were used to describe the loosely defined movement, including \"avant-garde\", \"energy music\" and \"The New Thing\". During its early and mid-60s heyday, much free jazz was released by established labels such as Prestige, Blue Note and Impulse, as well as independents such as ESP Disk and BYG Actuel. Free improvisation or \"free music\" is improvised music without any rules beyond the logic or inclination of the musician(s) involved. The term can refer to both a technique (employed by any musician in any genre) and as a recognizable genre in its own right. Free improvisation, as a genre of music, developed in the U.S. and Europe in the mid to late 1960s, largely as an outgrowth of free jazz and modern classical musics. None of its primary exponents can be said to be famous within mainstream; however, in experimental circles, a number of free musicians are well known, including saxophonists Evan Parker, Anthony Braxton, Peter Brötzmann and John Zorn, drummer Christian Lillinger, trombonist George Lewis, guitarists Derek Bailey, Henry Kaiser and Fred Frith and the improvising groups The Art Ensemble of Chicago and AMM.\n\nAllmusic Guide states that \"until around 1967, the worlds of jazz and rock were nearly completely separate\". The term, \"jazz-rock\" (or \"jazz/rock\") is often used as a synonym for the term \"jazz fusion\". However, some make a distinction between the two terms. The Free Spirits have sometimes been cited as the earliest jazz-rock band. During the late 1960s, at the same time that jazz musicians were experimenting with rock rhythms and electric instruments, rock groups such as Cream and the Grateful Dead were \"beginning to incorporate elements of jazz into their music\" by \"experimenting with extended free-form improvisation\". Other \"groups such as Blood, Sweat & Tears directly borrowed harmonic, melodic, rhythmic and instrumentational elements from the jazz tradition\". The rock groups that drew on jazz ideas (like Soft Machine, Colosseum, Caravan, Nucleus, Chicago, Spirit and Frank Zappa) turned the blend of the two styles with electric instruments. Since rock often emphasized directness and simplicity over virtuosity, jazz-rock generally grew out of the most artistically ambitious rock subgenres of the late 1960s and early 70s: psychedelia, progressive rock, and the singer-songwriter movement.\" Miles Davis' \"Bitches Brew\" sessions, recorded in August 1969 and released the following year, mostly abandoned jazz's usual swing beat in favor of a rock-style backbeat anchored by electric bass grooves. The recording \"...mixed free jazz blowing by a large ensemble with electronic keyboards and guitar, plus a dense mix of percussion.\" Davis also drew on the rock influence by playing his trumpet through electronic effects and pedals. While the album gave Davis a gold record, the use of electric instruments and rock beats created a great deal of consternation amongst some more conservative jazz critics.\n\nThe counterculture was not only affected by cinema, but was also instrumental in the provision of era-relevant content and talent for the film industry. \"Bonnie and Clyde\" struck a chord with the youth as \"the alienation of the young in the 1960s was comparable to the director's image of the 1930s.\" Films of this time also focused on the changes happening in the world. A sign of this was the visibility that the hippie subculture gained in various mainstream and underground media. Hippie exploitation films are 1960s exploitation films about the hippie counterculture with stereotypical situations associated with the movement such as marijuana and LSD use, sex and wild psychedelic parties. Examples include \"The Love-ins\", \"Psych-Out\", \"The Trip\", and \"Wild in the Streets\". The musical play \"Hair\" shocked stage audiences with full-frontal nudity. Dennis Hopper's \"Road Trip\" adventure \"Easy Rider\" (1969) became accepted as one of the landmark films of the era. \"Medium Cool\" portrayed the 1968 Democratic Convention alongside the 1968 Chicago police riots which has led to it being labeled as \"a fusion of cinema-vérité and political radicalism\". One film-studio attempt to cash in on the hippie trend was 1968's \"Psych-Out\", which is in contrast to the film version of Arlo Guthrie's \"Alice's Restaurant\", which some say portrayed the generation as \"doomed\". The music of the era was represented by films such as 1970s \"Woodstock\", a documentary of the music festival. \"(See also: List of films related to the hippie subculture)\" Inaugurated by the 1969 release of Andy Warhol \"Blue Movie\", the phenomenon of adult erotic films being publicly discussed by celebrities (like Johnny Carson and Bob Hope), and taken seriously by critics (like Roger Ebert), a development referred to, by Ralph Blumenthal of \"The New York Times\", as \"porno chic\", and later known as the Golden Age of Porn, began, for the first time, in modern American culture. According to award-winning author Toni Bentley, Radley Metzger 1976 film \"The Opening of Misty Beethoven\", based on the play \"Pygmalion\" by George Bernard Shaw (and its derivative, \"My Fair Lady\"), and due to attaining a mainstream level in storyline and sets, is considered the \"crown jewel\" of this 'Golden Age'.\n\nIn France the New Wave was a blanket term coined by critics for a group of French filmmakers of the late 1950s and 1960s, influenced by Italian Neorealism and classical Hollywood cinema. Although never a formally organized movement, the New Wave filmmakers were linked by their self-conscious rejection of classical cinematic form and their spirit of youthful iconoclasm and is an example of European art cinema. Many also engaged in their work with the social and political upheavals of the era, making their radical experiments with editing, visual style and narrative part of a general break with the conservative paradigm. The Left Bank, or \"Rive Gauche\", group is a contingent of filmmakers associated with the French New Wave, first identified as such by Richard Roud. The corresponding \"right bank\" group is constituted of the more famous and financially successful New Wave directors associated with \"Cahiers du cinéma\" (Claude Chabrol, François Truffaut, and Jean-Luc Godard). Left Bank directors include Chris Marker, Alain Resnais, and Agnès Varda. Roud described a distinctive \"fondness for a kind of Bohemian life and an impatience with the conformity of the Right Bank, a high degree of involvement in literature and the plastic arts, and a consequent interest in experimental filmmaking\", as well as an identification with the political left. Other film \"new waves\" from around the world associated with the 1960s are New German Cinema, Czechoslovak New Wave, Brazilian Cinema Novo and Japanese New Wave. During the 1960s, the term \"art film\" began to be much more widely used in the United States than in Europe. In the U.S., the term is often defined very broadly, to include foreign-language (non-English) \"auteur\" films, independent films, experimental films, documentaries and short films. In the 1960s \"art film\" became a euphemism in the U.S. for racy Italian and French B-movies. By the 1970s, the term was used to describe sexually explicit European films with artistic structure such as the Swedish film \"I Am Curious (Yellow)\". The 1960s was an important period in art film; the release of a number of groundbreaking films giving rise to the European art cinema which had countercultural traits in filmmakers such as Michelangelo Antonioni, Federico Fellini, Pier Paolo Pasolini, Luis Buñuel and Bernardo Bertolucci.\n\nIn his 1986 essay \"From Satori to Silicon Valley\", cultural historian Theodore Roszak pointed out that Apple Computer emerged from within the West Coast counterculture. Roszak outlines the Apple computer's development, and the evolution of 'the two Steves' (Steve Wozniak and Steve Jobs, the Apple's developers) into businessmen. Like them, many early computing and networking pioneers - after discovering LSD and roaming the campuses of UC Berkeley, Stanford, and MIT in the late 1960s and early 1970s - would emerge from this caste of social \"misfits\" to shape the modern world.\n\nMany hippies rejected mainstream organized religion in favor of a more personal spiritual experience, often drawing on indigenous and folk beliefs. If they adhered to mainstream faiths, hippies were likely to embrace Buddhism, Daoism, Hinduism, Unitarian Universalism and the restorationist Christianity of the Jesus Movement. Some hippies embraced neo-paganism, especially Wicca. Wicca is a witchcraft religion which became more prominent beginning in 1951, with the repeal of the Witchcraft Act of 1735, after which Gerald Gardner and then others such as Charles Cardell and Cecil Williamson began publicising their own versions of the Craft. Gardner and others never used the term \"Wicca\" as a religious identifier, simply referring to the \"witch cult\", \"witchcraft\", and the \"Old Religion\". However, Gardner did refer to witches as \"the Wica\". During the 1960s, the name of the religion normalised to \"Wicca\". Gardner's tradition, later termed Gardnerianism, soon became the dominant form in England and spread to other parts of the British Isles. Following Gardner's death in 1964, the Craft continued to grow unabated despite sensationalism and negative portrayals in British tabloids, with new traditions being propagated by figures like Robert Cochrane, Sybil Leek and most importantly Alex Sanders, whose Alexandrian Wicca, which was predominantly based upon Gardnerian Wicca, albeit with an emphasis placed on ceremonial magic, spread quickly and gained much media attention.\n\nIn his 1991 book, \"Hippies and American Values\", Timothy Miller described the hippie ethos as essentially a \"religious movement\" whose goal was to transcend the limitations of mainstream religious institutions. \"Like many dissenting religions, the hippies were enormously hostile to the religious institutions of the dominant culture, and they tried to find new and adequate ways to do the tasks the dominant religions failed to perform.\" In his seminal, contemporaneous work, \"The Hippie Trip\", author Lewis Yablonsky notes that those who were most respected in hippie settings were the spiritual leaders, the so-called \"high priests\" who emerged during that era.\n\nOne such hippie \"high priest\" was San Francisco State College instructor Stephen Gaskin. Beginning in 1966, Gaskin's \"Monday Night Class\" eventually outgrew the lecture hall, and attracted 1,500 hippie followers in an open discussion of spiritual values, drawing from Christian, Buddhist, and Hindu teachings. In 1970 Gaskin founded a Tennessee community called The Farm, and he still lists his religion as \"Hippie.\"\n\nTimothy Leary was an American psychologist and writer, known for his advocacy of psychedelic drugs. On September 19, 1966, Leary founded the League for Spiritual Discovery, a religion declaring LSD as its holy sacrament, in part as an unsuccessful attempt to maintain legal status for the use of LSD and other psychedelics for the religion's adherents based on a \"freedom of religion\" argument. \"The Psychedelic Experience\" was the inspiration for John Lennon's song \"Tomorrow Never Knows\" in The Beatles' album \"Revolver\". He published a pamphlet in 1967 called \"Start Your Own Religion\" to encourage just that (see below under \"writings\") and was invited to attend the January 14, 1967 Human Be-In a gathering of 30,000 hippies in San Francisco's Golden Gate Park In speaking to the group, he coined the famous phrase \"Turn on, tune in, drop out\".\n\nThe \"Principia Discordia\" is the founding text of Discordianism written by Greg Hill (Malaclypse the Younger) and Kerry Wendell Thornley (Lord Omar Khayyam Ravenhurst). It was originally published under the title \"Principia Discordia or How The West Was Lost\" in a limited edition of five copies in 1965. The title, literally meaning \"Discordant Principles\", is in keeping with the tendency of Latin to prefer hypotactic grammatical arrangements. In English, one would expect the title to be \"Principles of Discord.\"\n\nThe lasting impact, including unintended consequences, creative output and general legacy of the counterculture era continue to be actively discussed, debated, despised and celebrated.\n\nEven the notions of when the counterculture subsumed the Beat Generation, when it gave way to the successor generation, and what happened in between are open for debate. According to notable UK Underground and counterculture author Barry Miles, \"It seemed to me that the Seventies was when most of the things that people attribute to the sixties really happened: this was the age of extremes, people took more drugs, had longer hair, weirder clothes, had more sex, protested more violently and encountered more opposition from the establishment. It was the era of sex and drugs and rock'n'roll, as Ian Dury said. The countercultural explosion of the 1960s really only involved a few thousand people in the UK and perhaps ten times that in the USA – largely because of opposition to the Vietnam war, whereas in the Seventies the ideas had spread out across the world.\n\nA Columbia University teaching unit on the counterculture era notes: \"Although historians disagree over the influence of the counterculture on American politics and society, most describe the counterculture in similar terms. Virtually all authors—for example, on the right, Robert Bork in \"Slouching Toward Gomorrah: Modern Liberalism and American Decline\" (New York: Regan Books,1996) and, on the left, Todd Gitlin in \"The Sixties: Years of Hope, Days of Rage\" (New York: Bantam Books, 1987)—characterize the counterculture as self-indulgent, childish, irrational, narcissistic, and even dangerous. Even so, many liberal and leftist historians find constructive elements in it, while those on the right tend not to.\"\n\nScreen legend John Wayne equated aspects of 1960s social programs with the rise of the welfare state, \"…I know all about that. In the late Twenties, when I was a sophomore at USC, I was a socialist myself—but not when I left. The average college kid idealistically wishes everybody could have ice cream and cake for every meal. But as he gets older and gives more thought to his and his fellow man's responsibilities, he finds that it can't work out that way—that some people just won't carry their load ... I believe in welfare—a welfare work program. I don't think a fella should be able to sit on his backside and receive welfare. I'd like to know why well-educated idiots keep apologizing for lazy and complaining people who think the world owes them a living. I'd like to know why they make excuses for cowards who spit in the faces of the police and then run behind the judicial sob sisters. I can't understand these people who carry placards to save the life of some criminal, yet have no thought for the innocent victim.\"\n\nFormer liberal Democrat Ronald Reagan, who later became a conservative Governor of California and 40th President of the US, remarked about one group of protesters carrying signs, \"The last bunch of pickets were carrying signs that said 'Make love, not war.' The only trouble was they didn't look capable of doing either.\"\n\nThe \"generation gap\" between the affluent young and their often poverty-scarred parents was a critical component of 1960s culture. In an interview with journalist Gloria Steinem during the 1968 US presidential campaign, soon-to-be First Lady Pat Nixon exposed the generational chasm in worldview between Steinem, 20 years her junior, and herself after Steinem probed Mrs. Nixon as to her youth, role models, and lifestyle. A hardscrabble child of the Great Depression, Pat Nixon told Steinem, \"I never had time to think about things like that, who I wanted to be, or who I admired, or to have ideas. I never had time to dream about being anyone else. I had to work. I haven't just sat back and thought of myself or my ideas or what I wanted to do...I've kept working. I don't have time to worry about who I admire or who I identify with. I never had it easy. I'm not at all like you...all those people who had it easy.\"\n\nIn economic terms, it has been contended that the counterculture really only amounted to creating new marketing segments for the \"hip\" crowd.\n\nEven before the counterculture movement reached its peak of influence, the concept of the adoption of socially-responsible policies by establishment corporations was discussed by economist and Nobel laureate Milton Friedman (1962): \"Few trends could so thoroughly undermine the very foundation of our free society as the acceptance by corporate officials of a social responsibility other than to make as much money for their stockholders as possible. This is a fundamentally subversive doctrine. If businessmen do have a social responsibility other than making maximum profits for stockholders, how are they to know what it is? Can self-selected private individuals decide what the social interest is?\"\n\nIn the UK, commentator Peter Hitchens identified the counterculture as one of the contributing factors to what he saw as the malaise in British politics in 2009.\nIn 2003, author and former Free Speech activist Greil Marcus was quoted, \"What happened four decades ago is history. It's not just a blip in the history of trends. Whoever shows up at a march against war in Iraq, it always takes place with a memory of the efficacy and joy and gratification of similar protests that took place in years before…It doesn't matter that there is no counterculture, because counterculture of the past gives people a sense that their own difference matters.\"\n\nWhen asked about the prospects of the counterculture movement moving forward in the digital age, former Grateful Dead lyricist and self-styled \"cyberlibertarian\" John Perry Barlow said, \"I started out as a teenage beatnik and then became a hippie and then became a cyberpunk. And now I'm still a member of the counterculture, but I don't know what to call that. And I'd been inclined to think that that was a good thing, because once the counterculture in America gets a name then the media can coopt it, and the advertising industry can turn it into a marketing foil. But you know, right now I'm not sure that it is a good thing, because we don't have any flag to rally around. Without a name there may be no coherent movement.\"\n\nDuring the era, conservative students objected to the counterculture and found ways to celebrate their conservative ideals by reading books like J. Edgar Hoover's \"A Study of Communism\", joining student organizations like the College Republicans, and organizing Greek events which reinforced gender norms.\n\nFree Speech advocate and social anthropologist Jentri Anders observed that a number of freedoms were endorsed within a countercultural community in which she lived and studied: \"freedom to explore one's potential, freedom to create one's Self, freedom of personal expression, freedom from scheduling, freedom from rigidly defined roles and hierarchical statuses...\" Additionally, Anders believed some in the counterculture wished to modify children's education so that it didn't discourage, but rather encouraged, \"aesthetic sense, love of nature, passion for music, desire for reflection, or strongly marked independence.\"\n\nIn 2007, Merry Prankster Carolyn \"Mountain Girl\" Garcia commented, \"I see remnants of that movement everywhere. It's sort of like the nuts in Ben and Jerry's ice cream -- it's so thoroughly mixed in, we sort of expect it. The nice thing is that eccentricity is no longer so foreign. We've embraced diversity in a lot of ways in this country. I do think it's done us a tremendous service.\"\n\nThe following people are well known for their involvement in 1960s era counterculture. Some are key incidental or contextual figures, such as Beat Generation figures who also participated directly in the later counterculture era. The primary area(s) of each figure's notability are indicated, per these figures' Wikipedia pages. This section is not intended be exhaustive, but rather a representative cross section of individuals active within the larger movement. Although many of the people listed are known for civil rights activism, some figures whose primary notability was within the realm of the Civil Rights Movement are listed elsewhere. This section is not intended to create associations between any of the listed figures beyond what is documented elsewhere. (see also: List of civil rights leaders; Key figures of the New Left; Timeline of 1960s counterculture). \n\n\n\n", "id": "8544676", "title": "Counterculture of the 1960s"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3574959", "text": "Ecological pyramid\n\nAn ecological pyramid (also trophic pyramid, eltonian pyramid, energy pyramid, or sometimes food pyramid) is a graphical representation designed to show the biomass or bio productivity at each trophic level in a given ecosystem.\n\n\"Biomass pyramids\" show how much biomass (the amount of living or organic matter present in an organism) is present in the organisms at each trophic level, while \"productivity pyramids\" show the production or turnover in biomass. There is also \"pyramid of numbers\" which represent the number of organisms in each trophic level. They may be upright (e.g. Grassland ecosystem), inverted (parasitic ecosystem) or dumbbell shaped (forest ecosystem).\n\nEnergy pyramids begin with producers on the bottom (such as plants) and proceed through the various trophic levels (such as herbivores that eat plants, then carnivores that eat herbivores, then carnivores that eat those carnivores, and so on). The highest level is the top of the food chain.\n\nThe concept of pyramid of numbers (\"Eltonian pyramid\") was developed by Charles Elton (1927). Later, it would also be expressed in terms of biomass by Bodenheimer (1938).\n\nThe idea of pyramid of productivity or energy relies on works of G. Evelyn Hutchinson and Raymond Lindeman (1942).\n\nAn \"pyramid of numbers\" shows graphically the population of each level in a food chain. It is an upright pyramid given in an ecosystem, always the producers are more in number than any other Trophic level.\n\nAn \"pyramid of biomass\" shows the relationship between biomass and trophic level by quantifying the biomass present at each trophic level of an energy community at a particular time. It is a graphical representation of biomass (total amount of living or organic matter in an ecosystem) present in unit area in different tropic levels. Typical units are grams per meter, or calories per meter.\nThe pyramid of biomass may be \"inverted\". For example, in a pond ecosystem, the standing crop of phytoplankton, the major producers, at any given point will be lower than the mass of the heterotrophs, such as fish and insects. This is explained as the phytoplankton reproduce very quickly, but have much shorter individual lives.\n\nOne problem with biomass pyramids is that they can make a trophic level appear to contain more energy than it actually does. For example, all birds have beaks and skeletons, which despite having mass are not typically digested by the next trophic level.\n\nAn \"pyramid of productivity\" is often more useful, showing the production or turnover (the rate at which energy or mass is transferred from one trophic level to the next) of biomass at each trophic level. Instead of showing a single snapshot in time, productivity pyramids show the flow of energy through the food chain. Typical units are grams per meter per year or calories per meter per year. As with the others, this graph shows producers at the bottom and higher trophic levels on top.\n\nWhen an ecosystem is healthy, this graph produces a standard \"ecological pyramid\". This is because in order for the ecosystem to sustain itself, there must be more energy at lower trophic levels than there is at higher trophic levels. This allows organisms on the lower levels to not only to maintain a stable population, but also to transfer energy up the pyramid. The exception to this generalization is when portions of a food web are supported by inputs of resources from outside the local community. In small, forested streams, for example, the volume of higher levels is greater than could be supported by the local primary production.\n\nWhen energy is transferred to the next trophic level, typically only 10% of it is used to build new biomass, becoming stored energy (the rest going to metabolic processes) (Pauly and Christensen, 1995). In this case, in the \"pyramid of productivity\" each step will be 10% the size of the previous step (100,000, 10,000, 1,000, 100, 10, 1, .1, .01).\n\nThe advantages of the \"pyramid of productivity\" as a representation:\n\nThe disadvantages of the \"pyramid of productivity\" as a representation:\n\nNonetheless, productivity pyramids usually provide more insight into an ecological community when the necessary information is available.\n\n\n\n", "id": "3574959", "title": "Ecological pyramid"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54550458", "text": "Trophic coherence\n\nTrophic coherence is a property of directed graphs (or directed networks). It is based on the concept of trophic levels used mainly in ecology, but which can be defined for directed networks in general and provides a measure of hierarchical structure among nodes. Trophic coherence is the tendency of nodes to fall into well-defined trophic levels. It has been related to several structural and dynamical properties of directed networks, including the prevalence of cycles and network motifs, ecological stability, intervality, and spreading processes like epidemics and neuronal avalanches.\n\nConsider a directed network defined by \nthe formula_1 adjacency matrix formula_2.\nEach node formula_3 can be assigned a trophic level formula_4 according to\nwhere formula_6 is formula_3's in-degree, and nodes \nwith formula_8 (basal nodes) have formula_9 by convention.\nEach edge has a \"trophic difference\" associated, defined as formula_10.\nThe \"trophic coherence\" of the network is a measure of how tightly peaked the distribution of trophic distances,\nformula_11, \nis around its mean value, which is always formula_12.\nThis can be captured by an \"incoherence parameter\" formula_13, \nequal to the standard deviation of formula_11:\nwhere formula_16 is the number of edges in the network.\n\nThe figure shows two networks which differ in their trophic coherence. The position of the nodes on the vertical axis corresponds to their trophic level. In the network on the left, nodes fall into distinct (integer) trophic levels, so the network is maximally coherent formula_17. \nIn the one on the right, many of the nodes have fractional trophic levels, and the network is more incoherent formula_18.\n\nThe degree to which empirical networks are trophically coherent (or incoherent) can be investigated by comparison with a null model.\nThis is provided by the \"basal ensemble\", which comprises networks in which all non-basal nodes have the same proportion of basal nodes\nfor in-neighbours. Expected values in this ensemble converge to those of the widely used \"configuration ensemble\" in the limit formula_19, formula_20 (with formula_21 and formula_22 the numbers of nodes and edges), \nand can be shown numerically to be a good approximation for finite random networks. The basal ensemble expectation for the incoherence parameter is\nwhere formula_24 is the number of edges connected to basal nodes.\nThe ratio formula_25 measured in empirical networks reveals whether they are more or less coherent than the random expectation.\nFor instance, Johnson and Jones find in a set of networks that food webs are significantly coherent formula_26, metabolic networks are significantly incoherent formula_27, and gene regulatory networks are close to the random expectation formula_28.\n\nThere is as yet little understanding of the mechanisms which might lead to particular kinds of networks becoming significantly \ncoherent or incoherent. However, in systems which present correlations between trophic level and other features of nodes,\nprocesses which tended to favour the creation of edges between nodes with particular characteristics could induce coherence or incoherence.\nIn the case of food webs, predators tend to specialise on consuming prey with certain biological properties (such as size, speed or behaviour) \nwhich correlate with their diet, and hence with trophic level. \nThis has been suggested as the reason for food-web coherence. However, food-web models based on a \"niche axis\" do not reproduce realistic trophic coherence, which may mean either that this explanation is insufficient, or that several niche dimensions need to be considered.\n\nThe relation between trophic level and node function can be seen in networks other than food webs. The figure shows a word adjacency network derived from the book Green Eggs and Ham, by Dr Seuss. The height of nodes represents their trophic levels (according here to the edge direction which is the opposite of that suggested by the arrows, which indicate the order in which words are concatenated in sentences). The syntactic function of words is also shown with node colour. There is a clear relationship between syntactic function and trophic level: the mean trophic level of common nouns (blue) is formula_29, whereas that of verbs (red) is formula_30.\nThis example illustrates how tropic coherence or incoherence might emerge from node function, and also that the trophic structure of networks provides a means of identifying node function in certain systems.\n\nThere are various ways of generating directed networks with specified trophic coherence, all based on gradually introducing new edges \nto the system in such a way that the probability of each new candidate edge being accepted depends on the expected trophic difference it would have.\nThe \"preferential preying model\" is an evolving network model similar to the Barábasi-Albert model of preferential attachment, but inspired on an ecosystem that grows through immigration of new species.\nOne begins with formula_31 basal nodes and proceeds to introduce new nodes up to a total of formula_21.\nEach new node formula_3 is assigned a first in-neighbour formula_34 (a prey species in the food-web context) and a new \nedge is placed from formula_34 to formula_3. The new node is given a temporary trophic level formula_37.\nThen a further formula_38 new in-neighbours formula_39 are chosen for formula_3 from among those in the network according to their trophic levels. Specifically, for a new candidate in-neighbour formula_39, the probability of being chosen is a function of \nformula_42. Johnson \"et al\" use\nwhere formula_44 is a parameter which tunes the trophic coherence: for formula_45 maximally coherent networks are generated, and\nformula_13 increases monotonically with formula_44 for formula_48.\nThe choice of formula_38 is arbitrary. One possibility is to \nset to formula_50,\nwhere formula_51 is the number of nodes already in the network when formula_3 arrives, and formula_53 is a random variable drawn from a Beta distribution\nwith parameters formula_54 and\n(formula_56 being the desired number of edges).\nThis way, the \"generalised cascade model\" is recovered in the limit formula_57, and the degree distributions are as in the \"niche model\" and \"generalised niche model\".\nThis algorithm, as described above, generates networks with no cycles (except for self-cycles, if the new node formula_3 is itself considered among its candidate in-neighbours formula_39). In order for cycles of all lengths to be a possible, one can consider new candidate edges in which the new node formula_3 is the in-neighbour as well as those in which it would be the out-neighbour. The probability of acceptance of these edges, \nformula_61, then depends on formula_62.\n\nThe \"generalised preferential preying model\" is similar to the one described above, but has certain advantages. In particular, it is more analytically tractable, and one can generate networks with a precise number of edges formula_22.\nThe network begins with formula_31 basal nodes, and then a further formula_65 new nodes are added in the following way. When each enters the system, it is assigned a single in-neighbour randomly from among those already there. Every node then has an integer temporary trophic level \nformula_66. The remaining formula_67 edges are introduced as follows. Each pair of nodes formula_68 has two temporary trophic distances associated, formula_69 and formula_70. Each of these candidate edges is accepted with a probability that depends on this temporary distance. Klaise and Johnson use\nbecause they find the distribution of trophic distances in several kinds of networks to be approximately normal, and this choice leads to a range of the parameter formula_44 in which formula_73. Once all the edges have been introduced, one must recalculate the trophic levels of all nodes, since these will differ from the temporary ones originally assigned unless formula_74.\nAs with the preferential preying model, the average incoherence parameter formula_13 of the resulting networks is a monotonically increasing function of formula_44 for formula_77. The figure above shows two networks with different trophic coherence generated with this algorithm.\n\n", "id": "54550458", "title": "Trophic coherence"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1843913", "text": "Desert ecology\n\nDesert ecology is the study of interactions between both biotic and abiotic components of desert environments. A desert ecosystem is defined by interactions between organism populations, the climate in which they live, and any other non-living influences on the habitat. Deserts are arid regions with are generally associated with warm temperatures, however cold deserts also exist. Deserts can be found on every continent, with the largest being located in Antarctica, the Arctic, Northern Africa, and the Middle East.\n\nDeserts experience a wide range of temperatures and weather conditions. They can be classified into four types: hot, semiarid, coastal, and cold. Hot deserts have warm temperatures at all times of the year, and low annual precipitation. The lack of humidity in these deserts results in high temperatures during the daytime and large amounts of heat loss at night. Although the average annual temperature in hot deserts is 20 °C to 25 °C, extreme weather conditions can lead to temperatures from -18 °C to 49 °C. Rainfall generally occurs in concentrated bursts, followed by long periods of no precipitation. Semiarid deserts experience similar conditions to hot deserts, however the maximum and minimum temperatures tend to be less extreme, ranging from 10 °C to 38 °C. Coastal deserts are cooler than hot and semiarid deserts, with average summer temperatures between 13 °C and 24 °C. They also feature higher total rainfall values. Cold deserts are similar in temperature to coastal deserts, however they receive more annual precipitation, which much of it in the form of snow. Deserts are most notable for their dry climates resulting from rain-blocking mountain ranges and remoteness from oceanic moisture. Deserts occupy one-fifth of the Earth's land surface and occur in two belts: between 15° and 35° latitude in both the southern and northern hemispheres. These bands are associated with the high solar intensities that all areas in the tropics receive, and at the same time with dry air brought down by the descending arms of Hadley and Ferell atmospheric circulation cells.\n\nDeserts generally occur because of global wind patterns or rain shadows. Dry winds not only hold little moisture for these areas, but also tend to evaporate any water present. Rain shadows do not occur because of general wind patterns but rather, due to the wind passing over a mountain range. As air rises and cools, its relative humidity increases and some or most moisture rains out, leaving little to no water vapour to form precipitation on the other side of the mountain range.\n\nMany desert ecosystems are limited by available water levels, rather than rates of radiation or temperature. Water flow in these ecosystems can be thought of as similar to energy flow; in fact, it is often useful to look at water and energy flow together when studying desert ecosystems and ecology.\n\nWater availability in deserts may also be hindered by loose sediments. Dust clouds commonly form in windy, arid climates. Scientists have previously theorised that desert dust clouds would enhance rainfall, however some studies have shown that precipitation is actually inhibited by this phenomenon by absorbing moisture from the atmosphere. This absorption can result in a positive feedback loop, which leads to further desertification.\n\nDesert landscapes can contain a wide variety of geological features, such as oases, rock outcrops, dunes, and mountains. Dunes are structures formed by wind moving sediments into mounds. Desert dunes are generally classified based on their orientation relative to wind directly. Possibly the most recognisable dune type are transverse dunes, whose crests are transverse to the wind direction. Many dunes are considered to be active, meaning that they travel and change over time due to the influence of the wind. However, some dunes can be anchored in place by vegetation or topography, preventing their movement. Some dunes may also be referred to as sticky, which occurs when the individual grains of sand become cemented together. Sticky dunes tend to be more stable and resistant to wind reworking than loose dunes.\n\nAnalysis of geological features in desert environments can reveal a lot about the history of the area. Through observation and identification of rock deposits, geologists are able to interpret the order of events that occurred during desert formation. For example, research conducted on the surface geology of the Namib Desert allowed geologists to interpret ancient movements of the Kuiseb River based on rock ages and features identified in the area.\n\nDeserts support diverse communities of plant and animals that have evolved resistance to, and methods of circumventing of, the extreme temperatures and arid conditions. For example, desert grasslands are more humid and slightly cooler than its surrounding ecosystems. Many animals get their energy by eating plants, but desert plants give up the fruit of their production very reluctantly. To avoid intense temperatures, the majority of small desert mammals are nocturnal, and dig burrows in which they live. These burrows help maintain to prevent overheating and resulting loss of water, and to maintain the mammal's optimal temperature. Desert ecology is characterized by dry, alkaline soils, low net production and opportunistic feeding patterns by herbivores and carnivores. Other organisms' survival tactics are physiologically based. Such tactics include the completion of life cycles ahead of anticipated drought seasons, and storing water with the help of specialized organs.\n\nDesert climates are particularly demanding on endothermic organisms. In environments where the external temperature is less than their body temperature, most endotherms are able to balance heat production and heat loss to maintain a comfortable temperature. However, in deserts where air and ground temperatures exceed body temperature, endotherms must be able to dissipate the large amounts of heat being absorbed in these environments. In order to cope with extreme conditions, desert endotherms have adapted through the means of avoidance, relaxation of homeostasis, and specializations. Nocturnal desert rodents, like the kangaroo rat, will spend the daytime in cool burrows deep underground, and emerge at night to seek food. Birds are much more mobile than ground-dwelling endotherms, and can therefore avoid heat-induced dehydration by flying between water sources. To prevent overheating, the body temperatures of many desert mammals have adapted to be much higher than non-desert mammals. Camels, for example, can maintain body temperatures that are about equal to typical desert air temperatures. This adaptations allows camels to retain large amounts of water for extended periods of time. Other examples of higher body temperature in desert mammals include the diurnal antelope ground squirrel, and the oryx. Certain desert endotherms have evolved very specific and unique characteristics to combat dehydration. Male sandgrouse have specialized belly feathers that are able to trap and carry water. This allows the sandgrouse to provide a source of hydration for their chicks, who do not yet have the ability to fly to water sources themselves.\n\nAlthough deserts have severe climates, some plants still manage to grow. Plants that can survive in arid deserts are called xerophytes, meaning they are able to survive long dry periods. Such plants may close their stomata during the daytime and open them at night, at the time when a plant may load carbon dioxide while, thanks to lower temperatures, losing less water to evaporation.\n\nAdaptations in xerophytes include resistance to heat and water loss, increased water storage capabilities, and reduced surface area of leaves. One of the most common families of desert plants are the cacti, which are covered in sharp spines or bristles for defence. The bristles on certain cacti also have the ability to reflect sunlight, such as those of the old man cactus. Certain xerophytes, like oleander, feature stomata that are recessed as a form of protection against hot, dry desert winds, which allows the leaves to retain water more effectively. Another unique adaptation can be found in xerophytes like ocotillo, which are \"leafless during most of the year, thereby avoiding excessive water loss\".\n\nThe harsh climate of most desert regions is a major obstacle in conducting research into these ecosystems. In the environments requiring special adaptations to survive, it is often difficult or even impossible for researchers to spend extended periods of time investigating the ecology of such regions. To overcome the limitations imposed by desert climates, some scientists have used technological advancements in the area of remote sensing and robotics. One such experiment, conducted in 1997, had a specialised robot named Nomad travel through a portion of the Atacama Desert. During this expedition, Nomad travelled over 200 kilometres and provided the researchers with many photographs of sites visited along its path.\n\n", "id": "1843913", "title": "Desert ecology"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38348972", "text": "Bibliography of ecology\n\nThis is a bibliography of ecology.\n\n\n\n", "id": "38348972", "title": "Bibliography of ecology"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=306794", "text": "Glossary of ecology\n\nThis is a list of ecology topics. It relates to the science of ecology which is the study of the interactions between various species and their natural environment.\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n", "id": "306794", "title": "Glossary of ecology"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6571534", "text": "Outline of ecology\n\nThe following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to ecology:\n\nEcology – scientific study of the distribution and abundance of living organisms and how the distribution and abundance are affected by interactions between the organisms and their environment. The environment of an organism includes both physical properties, which can be described as the sum of local abiotic factors such as solar insolation, climate and geology, as well as the other organisms that share its habitat. Also called ecological science.\n\n\nEcology is a broad discipline comprising many sub-disciplines. The field of ecology can be sub-divided according to several classification schemes:\n\nArranged from lowest to highest complexity:\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\nEcozone\nThe World Wildlife Fund (WWF) developed a system of eight biogeographic realms (ecozones):\n\nEcoregion\nEcozones are further divided into ecoregions. The World has over 800 terrestrial ecoregions. \"See Lists of ecoregions by country.\"\n\n\n\n\n\n", "id": "6571534", "title": "Outline of ecology"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53394201", "text": "Socionature\n\nSocionature is the idea that nature and humanity are one and the same and can be thought of or referenced as a single concept. An example of this perspective would be the difference in experience two cultures might have with a drought. One culture might view drought as a form of natural variability in the environment and store surplus food for these times. Another culture might be engaged in for profit farming and see the drought as a damaging natural crisis. The first culture would be an example of a socionature viewpoint.\n\n", "id": "53394201", "title": "Socionature"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55562359", "text": "Faculty of Agronomic and Veterinary Science\n\nThe Faculty of Agronomic and Veterinary Science (FSAV) at Loyola University of Congo dates back to Agro-Veterinary Higher Institute founded by the Society of Jesus in Kinshasa in 1994. The purpose of its founding was to further ecologically sound and sustainable food development in the central African region.\n\nThe Jesuit Fathers of the Province of Central Africa founded in 1994 Agro-Veterinary Higher Institute (ISAV) for students from across Central and Sub-Saharan Africa. It strives to train agricultural and livestock technicians who will increase agricultural production and improve nutrition through sustainable development.\n\nWith the founding of Loyola University of Congo in 2016, ISAV was one of the two initial faculties in the new university, and was given its present name. FSAV does research in agriculture, veterinary science, and sustainable development, where sustainability involves anthropological, social, and economic factors. The focus of FSAV is on those who will remain in agricultural work and research, not on those who simply seek the degree or are headed for civil service jobs.\n\nIn 2015 ISAV was represented at the UN FAO conference in Rome which explored “mainstreaming food loss reduction initiatives for smallholders in food deficit areas”.\n\nIn April 2016 with the addition of the agrifood sector to the National Institute for Professional Preparation tasks, FSAV was chosen to train food processors in the interest of employment creation and poverty alleviation.\n\nThe 2020 Strategy is a joint initiative among various government ministries and eight tertiary institutions, including ULC. These institutions have been selected to implement this pilot experiment in issuing licenses and master's degrees and furnishing young talent trained to manage the DRC's unique biodiversity. ISAV's first initiative in this was a Professional Master Agroforestry program set up with the assistance of the German Corporation for International Cooperation (BIZ) in 2012.\n\nThe licentiate in agro-veterinary science takes 3 years beyond the baccalaureate. Masters programs requiring 5 years are offered in agricultural forestry, food production, and agribusiness. The doctoral program takes 8 years. From 1997 to 2015 the school produced 569 agro-veterinary technicians and 16 masters in agro-forestry. ISAV also works in cooperation with the Livestock Market Development program at the bachelor’s through doctoral level. A master's degree is also offered in Renewable Natural Resource Management.\n\nStudents at FSAV have access through TEEAL to over 275 agricultural and scientific journals.\n\nA United States-based student led a project at ISAV which researched the prospects of breeding crickets in Central Africa to alleviate the hunger problem. ISAV collaborated with the Canadian International Development Agency in a program to strengthen forestry and agroforestry training.\n\nResearch projects include the flea beetle, breeding crickets, and identifying a bioactive molecule in the closed matrix of wood cells.\n\nCERED is a program of FSAV which includes researchers, students, and local communities, in pursuit of a Jesuit vision for the world today. It works in conjunction with the Global Ignatian Advocacy Network which focuses on key areas including forests and water. CERED works on the analysis of climate change impact in the Kinshasa area to provide meteorological parameters for farmers and to establish a databank for monitoring climate variations and extreme weather events. CERED uses a multidisciplinary and participatory approach involving students, researchers, and local communities, and covers both theoretical and practical aspects of natural science and the social sciences, with the welfare of people at the core of the research concerns.\n\nInaugurated by ISAV in February 2016, CERED includes a five-year (2017-2022) research program with a focus on global knowledge of climate change, sustainable management of natural resources, and the impact of human activities in ecosystems. Research began in the Plateau de Batéké where ULC has an agroforestry center.\n", "id": "55562359", "title": "Faculty of Agronomic and Veterinary Science"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=827016", "text": "Lazarus taxon\n\nIn paleontology, a Lazarus taxon (plural \"taxa\") is a taxon that disappears for one or more periods from the fossil record, only to appear again later. Likewise in conservation biology and ecology, it can refer to species or populations that were thought to be extinct, and are rediscovered.\n\nThe term refers to the story in the Christian biblical Gospel of John, in which Jesus Christ raised Lazarus from the dead.\n\nLazarus taxa are observational artifacts that appear to occur either because of (local) extinction, later resupplied, or as a sampling artifact. The fossil record is inherently sporadic (only a very small fraction of organisms become fossilized, and an even smaller fraction discovered before destruction) and contains gaps not necessarily caused by extinction, particularly when the number of individuals in a taxon is very low.\n\nAfter mass extinctions, such as the Permian–Triassic extinction event, the Lazarus effect occurred for many taxa. However, there appears to be no link with the abundance of fossiliferous sites and the proportion of Lazarus taxa, and no missing taxa have been found in potential refuges. Therefore, reappearance of Lazarus taxa probably reflects the rebound after a period of extreme rarity during the aftermath of such extinctions.\n\nAn Elvis taxon is a look-alike that has supplanted an extinct taxon through convergent evolution.\n\nA zombie taxon is a taxon that contains specimens that have been collected from strata younger than the extinction of the taxon. Later such fossils turn out to be freed from the original seam and refossilized in a younger sediment. For example, a trilobite that gets eroded out of its Cambrian-aged limestone matrix, and reworked into Miocene-aged siltstone.\n\nA living fossil is an extant taxon that appears to have changed so little compared with fossil remains, that it is considered identical. Living fossils may occur regularly in the fossil record, such as the lampshell \"Lingula\", though the living species in this genus are not identical to fossil brachiopods.\n\nOther living fossils however are also Lazarus taxa if these have been missing from the fossil record for substantial periods of time, such as applies for coelacanths.\n\nFinally, the term \"Lazarus species\" is applied to organisms that have been rediscovered as being still alive after having been widely considered extinct for years, without ever having appeared in the fossil record. In this last case, the term Lazarus taxon is applied in neontology.\n\nAnimals that are Lazarus taxa are often cited by cryptozoologists as former cryptids.\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\nThe lack of public engagement around environmental issue has lead conservationists attempt new and more communication strategies. One of them is the focus on positive messages, of which Lazarus species are an important part One conservation outreach project that has focused exclusively on species rediscoveries is the Lost & Found project which aims to tell the stories of species once thought extinct but that were subsequently rediscovered.\n\n\n", "id": "827016", "title": "Lazarus taxon"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55625361", "text": "Lottery competition\n\nLottery competition in ecology is a model for how organisms compete. It was first used to describe competition in coral reef fish. Under lottery competition, many offspring compete for a large number of sites (e.g., many fry competing for a few territories, or many seedlings competing for a few treefall gaps). Under lottery competition, one individual is chosen randomly to \"win\" that site (typically becoming an adult soon after), and the \"losers\" typically die off. Thus, in an analogy to a lottery or raffle, every individual has an equal chance of winning (like every ticket has an equal chance of being chosen), and therefore more abundant species are proportionately more likely to win (just as an individual who buys more tickets is more likely to win). Some models generalize this idea by weighting some individuals who are more likely to be chosen (by analogy, this would be like some tickets counting as two tickets instead of one).\n\nLottery competition has been used to in understanding many key ideas in ecology, including the storage effect (species coexist because they are affected differently by environmental variation) and neutral theory (species diversity is maintained because species are competitively equivalent, and extinction rates are slow enough to be offset by speciation and dispersal events).\n", "id": "55625361", "title": "Lottery competition"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55684051", "text": "Ilo Center for Education, Organization, and Promotion of Development\n\nIlo Center for Education, Organization, and Promotion of Development (CEOPIlo) is a multifaceted social development effort begun in 1976 by the Society of Jesus in Ilo, Peru. \n\nAfter the 1950s the port city of Ilo saw a surge in migrants due to the growth of Southern Peru Copper Corporation in the area, whose operations caused critical ecological problems. CEOP Ilo was founded in 1976 in cooperation with the ministry of education as a Jesuit technical school, especially for the migrants drawn by the copper mining. The incentive for founding the school was the Jesuit preferential option for the poor. \n\nIn the 1980s two key civil organizations, Labor and CEOP Ilo, began working with urban marginalized communities encouraging local participation in the form of popular assemblies and neighborhood committees and, in concert with the municipal government, a Sustainable Development Plan (PDS). Institutional reform was needed, which led to assisting labor unions, forming leaders, and protecting the environment especially from the devastation wrought by the mining industry. With the return to democracy in the 1980s the need to form leaders at all levels had become even more urgent. Also self-employment and credit unions gave more opportunities to the poor.\n\nIn 1994 the need was perceived to offer more formal education so that the poor could participate as citizens in their own, integral development, especially through popular organizations. Activities increased throughout the 1990s with even greater popular participation in government and, by 1999, CEOP Ilo was included in innovative participatory budgeting discussions (PB) as well as in discussions on infrastructure and in negotiations with the copper company. By 2005, about 90% of the investment budget was subject to PB discussion. As an early example of PB in Peru, CEOP's efforts \"became a model for the New Organic Municipality Laws of Peru for the implementation of PB\", with noted improvement in governance and in the environment of Ilo. CEOP has also been signatory to international conventions on the environment.\n\nCEOP was involved from the start of Regional Participatory Education Councils (COPARE) in Peru, which provide for citizen input into public education policy. It has helped prepare civil society leaders to implement public policy for the benefit of the common people. It is credited with fostering inclusive public policy to provide safe and supportive schools in the region of Moquegua. It has also participated in the modernization of small businesses.\n\nPrograms and projects (with termination days for program completion)\nServices and Finances: talks and workshops are held to initiate people into these programs.\nCEOP ILO collaborates with Jesuit social centers internationally, and with the following groups in Peru.\n\nApostolic Jesuit Regional Platform (COURAGE): this joins together eight Jesuit institutions in the Tacna and Moquegua regions, for education and social promotion.\n\nNetwork of Social Centers of the Society of Jesus (SEPSI): this joins six Jesuit centers of social justice research, training, and action throughout the country. \n\nGovernance, Decentralization, and Regional Development Consortium: this unites the efforts of CEOP ILO with Jesus the Worker Agro-industrial Training Center (CCAIJO)\n\nSavings and Credit Strengthening Cooperative: this associates 39 entities for the development of small and micro-enterprises (EDPYMES) and microcredit NGOs throughout the country. \n\nCEOP ILO regularly publishes studies and reports in the areas of education, economic development, good governance, and renewable energy.\n", "id": "55684051", "title": "Ilo Center for Education, Organization, and Promotion of Development"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55704797", "text": "Jesus the Worker Agro-industrial Training Center\n\nJesus the Worker Agro-industrial Training Center (CCAIJO) was founded by the Jesuits in 1971 among the peasantry in the Quispicanchi Province of Peru. It trains farmers in sustainable development especially in the areas of processing, marketing, environmental care, and water projects along with improved housing and civic participation. \n\nIn 1969 the Society of Jesus assumed responsibility for the province of Quispicanchi in Peru, in the Catholic Archdiocese of Cusco. This province was one of the poorest in the southern Peruvian Andes and the Jesuits had just adopted a preferential option for the poor. They carried out anthropological and socio-economic studies which led to the founding in 1971 of a training center that become CCAIJO. It began with informal .courses in electricity, mechanics, and carpentry.\n\nThen during the 1980s, closer contact with the peasant communities directed the educational efforts into the areas of health and agriculture. During the Fujimori years of the early 90s, with little help from the State, the center's actions broadened and expanded. With more support from the state after 1995 the center facilitated the people's participation in their own development. \n\nBut poverty in the region persisted, in terms of disease, malnutrition, low life expectancy, and a poorly trained workforce. Into the 2000s CCAIJO works together with government and private groups to address in a flexible way the complex problems connected with development of the Quispicanchi Province.\n\nThe Spanish NGOs Entreculturas and Solidarity Workshop brought a delegation from CCAIJO to Ourense, Galicia, especially for the study of dairy farming and for the betterment of prospects in tourism. Entreculturas has also subsidized the Center's projects with €210,128 in recent years. ALBOAN is another Spanish NGO that has assisted CCAIJO since 2002. The German bishops' charity arm Misereor funded a watershed project that benefited over 1800 men and women in the Ocongate District. \n\nIn 2001, the Japanese embassy contributed US$42,895 for the construction of a CCAIJO irrigation project in Sonccomarca.\n\nCCAIJO partnered with the Jesuit centers for Research and Promotion of Farmers (CIPCA) and for Education, Organization, and Promotion of Development (CEOP) to form a consortium on \"Governance, Decentralization and Regional Development\" for the empowerment of civil society to participate in its own development. And in 2008 CCAIJO brought together 32 civil authorities to familiarize them with various successful initiatives in municipal management and in agricultural and social development projects.\n\nCCAIJO won the Antonio Brack Egg 2015 national award from the Ministry of Environment for its Projects to Confront Climate Change in Rural Areas with the construction of micro-dams. Also, since 2010 more than 1000 hectares of pine forest have been restored, which also provides for growth of edible mushrooms. And more than 150 families benefited from a healthy housing program, which includes diminishing smoke in the living quarters and better cooking and refrigeration practices. Canadian Jesuit International has helped with the dam-building project, along with agriculture and with the raising of cattle, llamas, and guinea pigs. In 2016 CCAIJO participated in an international conference on \"The Right to Food in Latin America\".\n\nCayetano Heredia University, Department of Education, offered assistance to CCAIJO to ameliorate the problem of underemployment in the Cusco Region. The Center sponsored dialogues on how to improve educational results in Huaro and Andahuaylillas districts in Cusco. And in 2014 Antonio Ruiz de Montoya University coordinated with CCAIJO in a course for journalists: \"Journalism, public policies and regional development\".\n\nCCAIJO is part of a consortium which has produced an Interactive Map of Entrepreneurship for southern Cuzco. Titles published by the Center include: \"Agrarian Religion and Christianity in the Central Peruvian Andes;\" \"Atlas of Quispicanchi; Law and Peasant Communities in Peru; Diagnosis of the Target Population of the Literacy Program; Study of the Province of Quispicanchi.\" \n", "id": "55704797", "title": "Jesus the Worker Agro-industrial Training Center"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55722008", "text": "Center for Paraguayan Studies Antonio Guasch\n\nCenter for Paraguayan Studies Antonio Guasch (CEPAG) is a non-governmental organization located in Paraguay and belonging to the Society of Jesus. It was created in 1967 and is dedicated to research, education, and social action. It is named after the Jesuit , a scholar of the Guarani language.\n\nCEPAG began in a period of dictatorship, 1967 to 1976, and was called the Center for Research and Social Action, to promote dialogue on politics, sociology, and religion in a university context. It also made efforts at organizing the peasantry and indigenous peoples. In 1976 under state repression more than half of its members withdrew or were imprisoned or exiled, though its \"Action\" magazine continued to publish learned studies. After 1986 some educational and development work in rural areas was undertaken, along with studies in the Guaraní culture and history. \"Action\" went from being a quarterly to ten issues a year and the Ediciones Montoya division of CEPAG was born, at first under the name of Editorial Loyola. After 2001 rural education and action continued and there was increased emphasis on research and communication. The Country Partnership project was launched to work toward unifying the country in an equitable way.\n\nParaguay's indigenous people number about 120,000 in 19 groups, constituting about 1.6% of the population and evenly divided between the east and the western Chaco. They need protection from export-oriented business interests that have exploited their lands for soybeans, maize, and trees. This has caused migrations and forced indigenous peoples to live as subsistence farmers, bereft of their community life. This despite the supposed protection of Law No. 904 for the protection of indigenous communities. Also, 30,000 of the indigenous live around Mennonite colonies where they furnish cheap labor. CEPAG is helping peasant farmers to achieve more healthy and sustainable production. It also works to better the situation of women in the home and working environment as well as in the public forum. The indigenous peoples have no national organization but in September 2017 they met to further organize at the local and regional levels, with the coordinating help of CEPAG and OXFAM.\n\nEntreculturas gave CEPAG €426,839 for three projects: improvement of the income capacity for 57 peasant families (2011), and again in 2014 for a much larger group; then in 2015 the grant was for the defense of the rights of the inhabitants of Bañados de Asunción. In 2017 CEPAG facilitated the construction of a sales center for agricultural products in . CEPAG also participated in a reforestation program with assistance from the US government, and was part of a coalition that challenged the prime minister's statement on the safety of herbicides used by corporations. In 2015 CEPAG represented Paraguay in a Justice and Peace Seminar sponsored by the religious order of Dominicans in Brazil.\n\nCEPAG is a member of Decidamos, a citizen advocacy group of NGOs, and in 2014 joined other NGOs in protesting Paraguayan activities of the TNCs Monsanto, Cargill, and Bunge. CEPAG has also been critical of the asymmetry of countries party to the Mercosur free trade agreement. It has distinguished itself in the study of medicinal herbs for the benefit of peasant families and has facilitated a local seeds fair held in the nation's capital.\n\nThe center publishes the monthly \"Action\" magazine, the oldest such publication in Paraguay. It promotes dialogue on faith and culture and advocates for greater equity and justice. CEPAG also publishes books as well as audios and audiovisuals. In 2010 and 2011 it produced a series of educational radio programs on Guarini agricultural experiences.\n\nOn the occasion its 50th jubilee in 2017, CEPAG held a teachers' conference on education and the family, and also Expo Acción with displays of the center's work spanning the areas of education, health, and advocacy for peoples' rights.\n\n", "id": "55722008", "title": "Center for Paraguayan Studies Antonio Guasch"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66575", "text": "Nutrient\n\nA nutrient is a substance used by an organism to survive, grow, and reproduce. The requirement for dietary nutrient intake applies to animals, plants, fungi, and protists. Nutrients can be incorporated into cells for metabolic purposes or excreted by cells to create non-cellular structures, such as hair, scales, feathers, or exoskeletons. Some nutrients can be metabolically converted to smaller molecules in the process of releasing energy, such as for carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, and fermentation products (ethanol or vinegar), leading to end-products of water and carbon dioxide. All organisms require water. Essential nutrients for animals are the energy sources, some of the amino acids that are combined to create proteins, a subset of fatty acids, vitamins and certain minerals. Plants require more diverse minerals absorbed through roots, plus carbon dioxide and oxygen absorbed through leaves. Fungi live on dead or living organic matter and meet nutrient needs from their host.\n\nDifferent types of organism have different essential nutrients. Ascorbic acid (vitamin C) is essential, meaning it must be consumed in sufficient amounts, to humans and some other animal species, but not to all animals and not to plants, which are able to synthesize it. Nutrients may be organic or inorganic: organic compounds include most compounds containing carbon, while all other chemicals are inorganic. Inorganic nutrients include nutrients such as iron, selenium, and zinc, while organic nutrients include, among many others, energy-providing compounds and vitamins. \n\nA classification used primarily to describe nutrient needs of animals divides nutrients into macronutrients and micronutrients. Consumed in relatively large amounts (grams or ounces), macronutrients (carbohydrates, fats, proteins, water) are used primarily to generate energy or to incorporate into tissues for growth and repair. Micronutrients are needed in smaller amounts (milligrams or micrograms); they have subtle biochemical and physiological roles in cellular processes, like vascular functions or nerve conduction. Inadequate amounts of essential nutrients, or diseases that interfere with absorption, result in a deficiency state that compromises growth, survival and reproduction. Consumer advisories for dietary nutrient intakes, such as the United States Dietary Reference Intake, are based on deficiency outcomes and provide macronutrient and micronutrient guides for both lower and upper limits of intake. In many countries, macronutrients and micronutrients in significant content are required by regulations to be displayed on food product labels. Nutrients in larger quantities than the body needs may have harmful effects. Edible plants also contain thousands of compounds generally called phytochemicals which have unknown effects on disease or health, including a diverse class with non-nutrient status called polyphenols, which remain poorly understood as of 2017.\n\nPlant nutrients consist of more than a dozen minerals absorbed through roots, plus carbon dioxide and oxygen absorbed or released through leaves. All organisms obtain all their nutrients from the surrounding environment.\n\nPlants absorb carbon, hydrogen and oxygen from air. These three, in the form of water and carbon dioxide.Other nutrients are absorbed from soil (exceptions include some parasitic or carnivorous plants). Counting these, there are 17 important nutrients for plants: the macronutrients nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), potassium (K), calcium (Ca), sulfur (S), magnesium (Mg), carbon (C), oxygen(O) and hydrogen (H), and the micronutrients iron (Fe), boron (B), chlorine (Cl), manganese (Mn), zinc (Zn), copper (Cu), molybdenum (Mo) and nickel (Ni). In addition to carbon, hydrogen and oxygen, nitrogen, phosphorus, and sulfur are also needed in relatively large quantities. Together, the \"Big Six\" are the elemental macronutrients for all organisms.\nThey are sourced from inorganic matter (for example, carbon dioxide, water, nitrates, phosphates, sulfates, and diatomic molecules of nitrogen and, especially, oxygen) and organic matter (carbohydrates, lipids, proteins).\n\nMacronutrients are defined in several ways.\n\nMacronutrients provide energy:\n\n\nFat has an energy content of 9kcal/g (~37.7 kJ/g); proteins and carbohydrates 4kcal/g (~16.7 kJ/g); ethanol 7kcal/g (~29.3 kJ/g).\n\nMicronutrients support metabolism.\n\n\nAn essential nutrient is a nutrient required for normal physiological function that cannot be synthesized in the body – either at all or in sufficient quantities – and thus must be obtained from a dietary source. Apart from water, which is universally required for the maintenance of homeostasis in mammals, essential nutrients are indispensable for various cellular metabolic processes and maintaining tissue and organ function. In the case of humans, there are nine amino acids, two fatty acids, thirteen vitamins and fifteen minerals that are considered essential nutrients. In addition, there are several molecules that are considered conditionally essential nutrients since they are indispensable in certain developmental and pathological states.\n\nAn essential amino acid is an amino acid that is required by an organism but cannot be synthesized \"de novo\" by it, and therefore must be supplied in its diet. Out of the twenty standard protein-producing amino acids, nine cannot be endogenously synthesized by humans: phenylalanine, valine, threonine, tryptophan, methionine, leucine, isoleucine, lysine, and histidine.\n\nEssential fatty acids (EFAs) are fatty acids that humans and other animals must ingest because the body requires them for good health but cannot synthesize them. Only two fatty acids are known to be essential for humans: alpha-linolenic acid (an omega-3 fatty acid) and linoleic acid (an omega-6 fatty acid).\n\nVitamins are organic molecules essential for an organism that are not classified as amino acids or fatty acids. They commonly function as enzymatic cofactors, metabolic regulators or antioxidants. Humans require thirteen vitamins in their diet, most of which are actually groups of related molecules (e.g. vitamin E includes tocopherols and tocotrienols). The list: vitamins A, C, D, E, K, Thiamine (B), Riboflavin (B), Niacin (B), Pantothenic Acid (B), Vitamin B, Biotin (B), Folate (B) and Vitamin B. The requirement for vitamin D is conditional, as people who get sufficient exposure to ultraviolet light, either from the sun or an artificial source, synthesize vitamin D in skin.\n\nMinerals are the exogenous chemical elements indispensable for life. Although the four elements: carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen, are essential for life, they are so plentiful in food and drink that these are not considered nutrients and there are no recommended intakes for these as minerals. The need for nitrogen is addressed by requirements set for protein, which is composed of nitrogen-containing amino acids. Sulfur is essential, but again does not have a recommended intake. Instead, recommended intakes are identified for the sulfur-containing amino acids methionine and cysteine. There are dietary supplements which provide sulfur, such as methylsulfonylmethane. \n\nThe essential nutrient elements for humans, listed in order of Recommended Dietary Allowance (expressed as a mass), are potassium, chlorine, sodium, calcium, phosphorus, magnesium, iron, zinc, manganese, copper, iodine, chromium, molybdenum, selenium and cobalt (the last as a component of vitamin B). There are other minerals which are essential for some plants and animals, but may or may not be essential for humans, such as boron and silicon.\n\nConditionally essential nutrients are certain organic molecules that can normally be synthesized by an organism, but under certain conditions in insufficient quantities. In humans, such conditions include premature birth, limited nutrient intake, rapid growth, and certain disease states. Choline, inositol, taurine, arginine, glutamine and nucleotides are classified as conditionally essential and are particularly important in neonatal diet and metabolism.\n\nNon-essential nutrients are substances within foods that can have a significant impact on health; these substances can be beneficial or toxic. For example, dietary fiber is not absorbed in the human digestive tract, but is important in maintaining the bulk of a bowel movement to avoid constipation. A subset of dietary fiber, known as soluble fiber, can be metabolized by bacteria residing in the large intestine. Soluble fiber is marketed as serving a prebiotic functionpromoting \"healthy\" intestinal bacteria. Bacterial metabolism of soluble fiber also produces short-chain fatty acids like butyric acid, which may be absorbed into intestinal cells as a source of calories.\n\nBy definition, phytochemicals include all nutritional and non-nutritional components of edible plants. Included as nutritional constituents are provitamin A carotenoids, whereas those without nutrient status are diverse polyphenols, flavonoids, resveratrol, and lignans – often claimed to have antioxidant effects – that are present in numerous plant foods. A number of phytochemical compounds are under preliminary research for their potential effects on human diseases and health. However, the qualification for nutrient status of compounds with poorly defined properties \"in vivo\" is that they must first be defined with a Dietary Reference Intake level to enable accurate food labeling, a condition not established for most phytochemicals that are claimed to be antioxidant nutrients.\n\n\"See Vitamin, Mineral (nutrient), Protein (nutrient)\"\n\nAn inadequate amount of a nutrient is a deficiency. Deficiencies can be due to a number of causes including an inadequacy in nutrient intake, called a dietary deficiency, or any of several conditions that interfere with the utilization of a nutrient within an organism. Some of the conditions that can interfere with nutrient utilization include problems with nutrient absorption, substances that cause a greater than normal need for a nutrient, conditions that cause nutrient destruction, and conditions that cause greater nutrient excretion. Nutrient toxicity occurs when excess consumption of a nutrient does harm to an organism.\n\nIn the United States and Canada, recommended dietary intake levels of essential nutrients are based on the minimum level that \"will maintain a defined level of nutriture in an individual\", a definition somewhat different from that used by the World Health Organization and Food and Agriculture Organization of a \"basal requirement to indicate the level of intake needed to prevent pathologically relevant and clinically detectable signs of a dietary inadequacy\". \n\nIn setting human nutrient guidelines, government organizations do not necessarily agree on amounts needed to avoid deficiency or maximum amounts to avoid the risk of toxicity. For example, for vitamin C, recommended intakes range from 40 mg/day in India to 155 mg/day for the European Union. The table below shows U.S. Estimated Average Requirements (EARs) and Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) for vitamins and minerals, PRIs for the European Union (same concept as RDAs), followed by what three government organizations deem to be the safe upper intake. RDAs are set higher than EARs to cover people with higher than average needs. Adequate Intakes (AIs) are set when there is not sufficient information to establish EARs and RDAs. Governments are slow to revise information of this nature. For the U.S. values, with the exception of calcium and vitamin D, all of the data date to 1997-2004. \n\n\nEAR U.S. Estimated Average Requirements.\n\nRDA U.S. Recommended Dietary Allowances; higher for adults than for children, and may be even higher for women who are pregnant or lactating.\n\nAI U.S. Adequate Intake; AIs established when there is not sufficient information to set EARs and RDAs.\n\nPRI Population Reference Intake is European Union equivalent of RDA; higher for adults than for children, and may be even higher for women who are pregnant or lactating. For Thiamin and Niacin the PRIs are expressed as amounts per MJ of calories consumed. MJ = megajoule = 239 food calories. \n\nUpper Limit Tolerable upper intake levels.\n\nND ULs have not been determined.\n\nNE EARs, PRIs or AIs have not yet been established or will not be (EU does not consider chromium an essential nutrient).\n\n", "id": "66575", "title": "Nutrient"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55990616", "text": "Migration (ecology)\n\nMigration, in ecology, is the large-scale movement of members of a species to a different environment. Migration is a natural behavior and component of the life cycle of many species of mobile organisms, not limited to animals, though animal migration is the best known type. Migration is often cyclical, frequently occurring on a seasonal basis, and in some cases on a daily basis. Species migrate to take advantage of more favorable conditions with respect to food availability, safety from predation, mating opportunity, or other environmental factors. Types of migration include:\n\n\n", "id": "55990616", "title": "Migration (ecology)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55998971", "text": "List of mammals that perform mass migrations\n\nMass migrations take place, or used to take place, in the following mammals:\n\nAfrica:\nNorth America:\nNorth America and Eurasia:\nEurasia:\n\nOf these migrations, those of the springbok, black wildebeest, blesbok, scimitar-horned oryx, and kulan have ceased.\n", "id": "55998971", "title": "List of mammals that perform mass migrations"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=166931", "text": "River delta\n\nA river delta is a landform that forms from deposition of sediment carried by a river as the flow leaves its mouth and enters slower-moving or standing water. This occurs where a river enters an ocean, sea, estuary, lake, reservoir, or (more rarely) another river that cannot transport away the supplied sediment. The size and shape of a delta is controlled by the balance between watershed processes that supply sediment and receiving basin processes that redistribute, sequester, and export that sediment. The size, geometry, and location of the receiving basin also plays an important role in delta evolution. River deltas are important in human civilization, as they are major agricultural production centers and population centers. They can provide coastline defense and can impact drinking water supply. They are also ecologically important, with different species assemblages depending on their landscape position.\n\nRiver deltas form when a river carrying sediment reaches either (1) a body of water, such as a lake, ocean, or reservoir, (2) another river that cannot remove the sediment quickly enough to stop delta formation, or (3) an inland region where the water spreads out and deposits sediments. The tidal currents also cannot be too strong, as sediment would wash out into the water body faster than the river deposits it. The river must carry enough sediment to layer into deltas over time. The river's velocity decreases rapidly, causing it to deposit the majority, if not all, of its load. This alluvium builds up to form the river delta. When the flow enters the standing water, it is no longer confined to its channel and expands in width. This flow expansion results in a decrease in the flow velocity, which diminishes the ability of the flow to transport sediment. As a result, sediment drops out of the flow and deposits. Over time, this single channel builds a deltaic lobe (such as the bird's-foot of the Mississippi or Ural river deltas), pushing its mouth into the standing water. As the deltaic lobe advances, the gradient of the river channel becomes lower because the river channel is longer but has the same change in elevation (see slope).\n\nAs the slope of the river channel decreases, it becomes unstable for two reasons. First, gravity makes the water flow in the most direct course down slope. If the river breaches its natural levees (i.e., during a flood), it spills out onto a new course with a shorter route to the ocean, thereby obtaining a more stable steeper slope. Second, as its slope gets lower, the amount of shear stress on the bed decreases, which results in deposition of sediment within the channel and a rise in the channel bed relative to the floodplain. This makes it easier for the river to breach its levees and cut a new channel that enters the body of standing water at a steeper slope. Often when the channel does this, some of its flow remains in the abandoned channel. When these channel-switching events occur, a mature delta develops a distributary network.\n\nAnother way these distributary networks form is from deposition of mouth bars (mid-channel sand and/or gravel bars at the mouth of a river). When this mid-channel bar is deposited at the mouth of a river, the flow is routed around it. This results in additional deposition on the upstream end of the mouth-bar, which splits the river into two distributary channels. A good example of the result of this process is the Wax Lake Delta.\n\nIn both of these cases, depositional processes force redistribution of deposition from areas of high deposition to areas of low deposition. This results in the smoothing of the planform (or map-view) shape of the delta as the channels move across its surface and deposit sediment. Because the sediment is laid down in this fashion, the shape of these deltas approximates a fan. The more often the flow changes course, the shape develops as closer to an ideal fan, because more rapid changes in channel position results in more uniform deposition of sediment on the delta front. The Mississippi and Ural River deltas, with their bird's-feet, are examples of rivers that do not avulse often enough to form a symmetrical fan shape. Alluvial fan deltas, as seen by their name, avulse frequently and more closely approximate an ideal fan shape.\n\nDeltas are typically classified according to the main control on deposition, which is a combination of river, wave, and tidal processes, depending on the strength of each. The other two factors that play a major role are landscape position and the grain size distribution of the source sediment entering the delta from the river.\n\nIn wave dominated deltas, wave-driven sediment transport controls the shape of the delta, and much of the sediment emanating from the river mouth is deflected along the coast line. The relationship between waves and river deltas is quite variable and largely influenced by the deepwater wave regimes of the receiving basin. With a high wave energy near shore and a steeper slope offshore, waves will make river deltas smoother. Waves can also be responsible for carrying sediments away from the river delta, causing the delta to retreat. For deltas that form further upriver in an estuary, there are complex yet quantifiable linkages between winds, tides, river discharge, and delta water levels.\n\nErosion is also an important control in tide dominated deltas, such as the Ganges Delta, which may be mainly submarine, with prominent sand bars and ridges. This tends to produce a \"dendritic\" structure. Tidal deltas behave differently from river- and wave-dominated deltas, which tend to have a few main distributaries. Once a wave- or river-dominated distributary silts up, it is abandoned, and a new channel forms elsewhere. In a tidal delta, new distributaries are formed during times when there is a lot of water around – such as floods or storm surges. These distributaries slowly silt up at a more or less constant rate until they fizzle out.\n\nA Gilbert delta (named after Grove Karl Gilbert) is a specific type of delta formed from coarse sediments, as opposed to gently-sloping muddy deltas such as that of the Mississippi. For example, a mountain river depositing sediment into a freshwater lake would form this kind of delta.\n\nG. K. Gilbert himself first described this type of delta on Lake Bonneville in 1885. Elsewhere, similar structures occur, for example, at the mouths of several creeks that flow into Okanagan Lake in British Columbia and forming prominent peninsulas at Naramata (), Summerland (), or Peachland ().\n\nA tidal freshwater delta is a sedimentary deposit formed at the boundary between an upland stream and an estuary, in the region known as the \"subestuary\". Drowned coastal river valleys that were inundated by rising sea levels during the late Pleistocene and subsequent Holocene tend to have dendritic estuaries with many feeder tributaries. Each tributary mimics this salinity gradient from their brackish junction with the mainstem estuary up to the fresh stream feeding the head of tidal propagation. As a result, the tributaries are considered to be \"subestuaries\". The origin and evolution of a tidal freshwater delta involves processes that are typical of all deltas as well as processes that are unique to the tidal freshwater setting. The combination of processes that create a tidal freshwater delta result in a distinct morphology and unique environmental characteristics. Many tidal freshwater deltas that exist today are directly caused by the onset of or changes in historical land use, especially deforestation, intensive agriculture, and urbanization. These ideas are well illustrated by the many tidal freshwater deltas prograding into Chesapeake Bay along the east coastline of the United States. Research has demonstrated that the accumulating sediments in this estuary derive from post-European settlement deforestation, agriculture, and urban development.\n\nOther rivers, particularly those on coasts with significant tidal range, do not form a delta but enter into the sea in the form of an estuary. Notable examples include the Saint Lawrence River and the Tagus estuary.\n\nIn rare cases the river delta is located inside a large valley and is called an inverted river delta. Sometimes a river divides into multiple branches in an inland area, only to rejoin and continue to the sea. Such an area is called an \"inland delta\", and often occurs on former lake beds. The Inner Niger Delta and Peace–Athabasca Delta are notable examples. The Amazon has also an inland delta before the island of Marajó.\n\nIn some cases, a river flowing into a flat arid area splits into channels that evaporate as it progresses into the desert. Okavango Delta in Botswana is one well-known example.\n\nThe generic term \"mega delta\" can be used to describe very large Asian river deltas, such as the Changjiang (Yangtze), Pearl, Red, Mekong, Irrawaddy, Ganges-Brahmaputra, and Indus.\n\nThe formation of a delta is complicated, multiple, and cross-cutting over time, but in a simple delta three main types of bedding may be distinguished: the bottomset beds, foreset/frontset beds, and topset beds. This three part structure may be seen in small scale by crossbedding.\n\nThe Ganges/Brahmaputra combination delta, which spans most of Bangladesh and empties into the Bay of Bengal, is the world's largest delta.\n\nThe St. Clair River delta, between the Canadian province of Ontario and the U.S. state of Michigan, is the largest delta emptying into a body of fresh water.\n\nOther rivers with notable deltas include:\nHuman activities, such as the creation of dams for hydroelectric power or to create reservoirs can radically alter delta ecosystems. Dams block sedimentation, which can cause the delta to erode away. The use of water upstream can greatly increase salinity levels as less fresh water flows to meet the salty ocean water. While nearly all deltas have been impacted to some degree by humans, the Nile Delta and Colorado River Delta are some of the most extreme examples of the ecological devastation caused to deltas by damming and diversion of water. Construction, irrigation, and land alteration have impacted delta formation. As humans have altered surface roughness, runoff, and groundwater storage, studies have shown river delta retreat. However, historical data documents show that during the Roman Empire and Little Ice Age (times where there was considerable anthropogenic pressure), there were significant sediment accumulation in deltas. The industrial revolution has only amplified the impact of humans on delta growth and retreat.\n\nAncient deltas are a benefit to the economy due to their well sorted sand and gravel. Sand and gravel is often quarried from these old deltas and used in concrete for highways, buildings, sidewalks, and even landscaping. More than 1 billion tons of sand and gravel are produced in the United States alone. Not all sand and gravel quarries are former deltas, but for ones that are, a lot of the sorting is already done by the power of water.\n\nAs lowlands often adjacent to urban areas, deltas often comprise extensive industrial and commercial areas as well as agricultural land. These uses are often in conflict. The Fraser Delta in British Columbia, Canada, includes the Vancouver Airport and the Roberts Bank Superport and the Annacis Island industrial zone, and a mix of commercial, residential and agricultural land. Space is so limited in the Lower Mainland region, and in British Columbia in general, which is very mountainous, that the Agricultural Land Reserve was created to preserve agricultural land for food production.\n\nResearchers have found a number of examples of deltas that formed in Martian lakes. Finding deltas is a major sign that Mars once had large amounts of water. Deltas have been found over a wide geographical range. Below are pictures of a few.\n\n\n\n", "id": "166931", "title": "River delta"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54252064", "text": "Resource selection function\n\nResource selection functions (RSFs) are a class of functions that are used in spatial ecology to assess which habitat characteristics are important to a specific population or species of animal, by assessing the a probability of that animal using a certain resource proportional to the availability of that resource in the environment.\n\nResource Selection Functions require two types of data: location information for the wildlife in question, and data on the resources available across the study area. Resources can include a broad range of environmental and geographical variables, including categorical variables such as land cover type, or continuous variables such as average rainfall over a given time period. A variety of methods are used for modeling RSFs, with logistic regression being commonly used.\n\nRSFs can be fit to data where animal presence is known, but absence is not, such as for species where several individuals within a study area are fitted with a GPS collar, but some individuals may be present without collars.\nWhen this is the case, buffers of various distances are generated around known presence points, with a number of available points generated within each buffer, which represent areas where the animal could have been, but it is unknown whether they actually were. These models can be fit using binomial generalized linear models or binomial generalized linear mixed models, with the resources, or environmental and geographic data, as explanatory variables.\n\nResource selection functions can be modeled at a variety of spatial scales, depending on the species and the scientific question being studied. (insert one more sentence on scale)\n\nMost RSFs address one of the following scales, which were defined by Douglas Johnson in 1980 and are still used today:\n", "id": "54252064", "title": "Resource selection function"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55613887", "text": "Seascape ecology\n\nSeascape ecology is a scientific discipline that deals with the causes and ecological consequences of spatial pattern in the marine environment, drawing heavily on conceptual and analytical frameworks developed in terrestrial landscape ecology.. \n\nSeascape ecology, the application of landscape ecology concepts to the marine environment has been slowly emerging since the 1970s , yielding new ecological insights and showing growing potential to support the development of ecologically meaningful science-based management practices . For marine systems, the application of landscape ecology came about through a recognition that many of the concepts developed in the theory of island biogeography and the study of patch dynamics (precursors to modern landscape ecology) could be applicable to a range of marine environments from plankton patches to patch reefs , intertidal mussel beds and seagrasses meadows . Progress in the ecological understanding of spatial patterning was not confined to shallow seafloor environments. For the open ocean, advances in ocean observing systems since the 1970s have allowed scientists to map, classify, quantify and track dynamic spatial structure in the form of eddies, surface roughness, currents, runoff plumes, ice, temperature fronts and plankton patches using oceanographic technologies – a theme increasingly referred to as pelagic seascape ecology .Subsurface structures too, such as internal waves, thermoclines, haloclines, boundary layers and stratification resulting in distinct layering of organisms, is increasingly being mapped and modelled in multiple dimensions.\n\nLike landscape ecologists, seascape ecologists are interested in the spatially explicit geometry of patterns and the relationships between pattern, ecological processes and environmental change. A central tenet in landscape ecology is that patch context matters, where local conditions are influenced by attributes of the surroundings. For instance, the physical arrangement of objects in space, and their location relative to other things, influences how they function. A landscape ecologist will ask different questions focused at different scales than other scientists, such as: What are the ecological consequences of different shaped patches, patch size, quality, edge geometry, spatial arrangement and diversity of patches across the landscape? At what scale(s) is structure most influential? How do landscape patterns influence the way that animals find food, evade predators and interact with competitors? How does human activity alter the structure and function of landscapes?\n\nSeveral guiding principles that exist at the core of landscape ecology have made major contributions to terrestrial landscape planning and conservation, but in marine systems our understanding is still in its infancy. The first book on seascape ecology was published in December 2017\n\nSeascapes are defined broadly as spatially heterogeneous and dynamic spaces that can be delineated at a wide range of scales in time and space. With regard to seascapes defined by sampling units, a 1 m quadrat can be a valid seascape sample unit (SSU), just as can a 1 km analytical window in a geographical information system. The wide diversity of possible focal scales in marine ecology means that the term seascape cannot be used as an indication of scale, or a level of organisation.\nThe sea exhibits complex spatial patterning that can be mapped and quantified, such as gradients in plant communities across tidal saltmarshes or the intricate mosaics of patches typical of coral reefs. In the open ocean too, dynamic spatial structure in the form of water currents, eddies, temperature fronts and plankton patches can be measured readily. Physical processes such as storms dramatically influence spatial patterning in the environment and human activity can also directly create patch structure, modify mosaic composition and even completely remove elements of the seascape. Furthermore, climate-change induced shifts in species related to water temperature change and sea level rise are driving a gradual reconfiguration of the geography of species and habitats.\n\nThe patterns revealed by remote sensing devices are most often mapped and represented using two types of model: (1) collections of discrete patches forming mosaics e.g. as represented in two-dimensional benthic habitat map, or (2) continuously varying gradients in three-dimensional terrain models e.g. in remotely sensed bathymetric data. In landscape ecology, patches can be classified into a binary patch-matrix model based on island biogeography theory where a focal habitat patch type (e.g. seagrasses) is surrounded by an inhospitable matrix (e.g. sand), or a patch-mosaic of interconnected patches, where the interactions of the parts influence the ecological function of the whole mosaic. Both patch and gradient models have provided important insights into the spatial ecology of marine species and biodiversity.\n\nScale, the spatial or temporal dimensions of a phenomenon, is central to seascape ecology and the topic permeates all applications of a seascape ecology approach from conceptual models through to design of sampling, analyses and interpretation of results. Species and life-stage responses to patchiness and gradients in environmental structure are likely to be scale dependent, therefore, scale selection is an important task in any ecological study. Seascape ecology acknowledges that decisions made for scaling ecological studies influence our perspective and ultimately our understanding of ecological patterns and processes. Historically, marine scientists have played a significant role in communicating the importance of scale in ecology\n\nIn 1963, a physical oceanographer,Henry Stommel, published a conceptual diagram that was to have a profound effect on all of the environmental sciences . The diagram depicted variation in sea level height at spatial scales from centimetres to that of the planet and at time scales from seconds to tens of millennia. The oceanographer John Steele (1978) adapted the Stommel diagram to depict the spatial and temporal scales of patchiness in phytoplankton, zooplankton and fish.\n\nMeasuring habitat structure at multiple scales is typical in seascape ecology, particularly where a single meaningful scale is not known or not meaningful to the ecological process of interest. Multi-scale measurements have been used to discover the scale at which populations are associated with key habitat features. With regard to scaling seascapes, one approach is to select spatial and temporal scales to be ecologically meaningful to the organism’s movements or other processes of interest. The absence of information, or the lack of continuous observation on the way animals use space through time, can all too often result in insufficient consideration of seascape context potentially resulting in misleading conclusions on the primary drivers of ecological patterns and processes. Pittman and McAlpine (2003) offer a multi-scale framework for scaling ecological studies that integrates hierarchy theory with movement ecology and the concept of ecological neighborhoods. Here the focal scale is guided by the spatial and temporal scales relevant to an ecological process of interest. The focal scale is nested within a spatial hierarchy that incorporates patterns and processes at both finer and broader scales\n", "id": "55613887", "title": "Seascape ecology"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1654276", "text": "Antrum\n\nIn biology, antrum is a general term for a cavity or chamber, which may have specific meaning in reference to certain organs or sites in the body.\n\nIn vertebrates, it may refer specifically to:\n\nIn invertebrates, it may refer specifically to:\n", "id": "1654276", "title": "Antrum"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1086211", "text": "Androtomy\n\nAndrotomy (\"dissection of a male\" in Ancient Greek) is the dissection of the human body. Another term for it is anthropotomy \"dissection of a human\". Androtomy is to be distinguished from zoötomy \"dissection of an animal\".\n\nThe first recorded dissection of the human body in the Western world took place in ancient Alexandria by Herophilus and Erasistratus. Though none of their writings have come down to us, other medical writers recorded what they had discovered. \n\nOne such writer was Celsus who wrote in \"On Medicine I Proem 23\", \"Herophilus and Erasistratus proceeded in by far the best way: they cut open living men - criminals they obtained out of prison from the kings and they observed, while their subjects still breathed, parts that nature had previously hidden, their position, color, shape, size, arrangement, hardness, softness, smoothness, points of contact, and finally the processes and recesses of each and whether any part is inserted into another or receives the part of another into itself.\"\n\nGalen was another such writer who was familiar with the studies of Herophilus and Erasistratus.\n\n\n\n", "id": "1086211", "title": "Androtomy"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3700475", "text": "Introitus\n\nAn introitus is an entrance that goes into a canal or hollow organ. The vaginal introitus is the opening that leads to the vaginal canal.\n", "id": "3700475", "title": "Introitus"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2452242", "text": "List of anatomical isthmi\n\nIn anatomy, isthmus refers to a constriction between organs. This is a list of anatomical isthmi:\n", "id": "2452242", "title": "List of anatomical isthmi"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8332631", "text": "Canal (anatomy)\n\nIn anatomy, a canal (or canalis in Latin) is a tubular passage or channel which connects different regions of the body.\n\nExamples include:\n\n\n\n", "id": "8332631", "title": "Canal (anatomy)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2906587", "text": "Dorsiventral\n\nA dorsiventral (Lat. \"dorsum\", \"the back\", \"venter\", \"the belly\") organ is one that has two surfaces differing from each other in appearance and structure, as an ordinary leaf. This term has also been used as a synonym for dorsoventral organs, those that extend from a dorsal to a ventral surface.\nThis word is also used to define body structure of an organism, e.g. Platyhelminthes have dorsiventrally flattened body.\n", "id": "2906587", "title": "Dorsiventral"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12149337", "text": "Aditus\n\nAn aditus is the opening to some interior space or cavity.\n\nIn anatomy it can refer to the:\n\n", "id": "12149337", "title": "Aditus"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2322579", "text": "Coronal plane\n\nA coronal plane (also known as the frontal plane) is any vertical plane that divides the body into ventral and dorsal (belly and back) sections.\n\nIt is one of the three main planes of the body used to describe the location of body parts in relation to each other.\n\nThe coronal plane is an example of a longitudinal plane, because it is perpendicular to the transverse plane. For a human, the mid-coronal plane would transect a standing body into two halves (front and back, or anterior and posterior) in an imaginary line that cuts through both shoulders. The description of the coronal plane applies to most animals as well as humans even though humans walk upright and the various planes are usually shown in the vertical orientation.\n\nAbduction and adduction are terms for movements of limbs relative to the coronal plane.\n\nThe sternal plane (\"planum sternale\") is a coronal plane which transects the front of the sternum.\n\nThe term is derived from Latin corona (“garland, crown”), from Ancient Greek κορώνη (korōnē, “garland, wreath”).\n\n", "id": "2322579", "title": "Coronal plane"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2075950", "text": "Process (anatomy)\n\nIn anatomy, a process () is a projection or outgrowth of tissue from a larger body. For instance, in a vertebra, a process may serve for muscle attachment and leverage (as in the case of the transverse and spinous processes), or to fit (forming a synovial joint), with another vertebra (as in the case of the articular processes). The word is used even at the microanatomic level, where cells can have processes such as cilia or pedicels. Depending on the tissue, processes may also be called by other terms, such as \"apophysis\", \"tubercle\", or \"protuberance\".\n\nExamples of processes include:\n\n\n", "id": "2075950", "title": "Process (anatomy)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15352962", "text": "Obturator process\n\nThe obturator process is an anatomical feature on the pelvis of archosaurs.\n\nIt is a raised area of the ischium bone of the pelvis. It is the origin of muscles that attach to the femur and aid in running. These muscles are called M. pubo-ischio-femoralis externus 1 and 2 in crocodylians. In birds the muscles are called the M. obturatorius lateralis and M. obturatorius medialis. They insert on the greater trochanter of the femur. See proximodorsal process\n", "id": "15352962", "title": "Obturator process"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3432531", "text": "Lumen (anatomy)\n\nIn biology, a lumen (plural lumina) is the inside space of a tubular structure, such as an artery or intestine. It comes .\n\nIt can refer to:\n\nIn cell biology, a lumen is a membrane-defined space that is found inside several organelles, cellular components, or structures:\n\n\"Transluminal procedures\" are procedures occurring through lumina, including:\n\n", "id": "3432531", "title": "Lumen (anatomy)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=372131", "text": "Fissure\n\nIn anatomy, a fissure (Latin \"fissura\", plural \"fissurae\") is a groove, natural division, deep furrow, elongated cleft, or tear in various parts of the body also generally called a sulcus, or in the brain a sulcus.\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\nFissure can also refer to an unnatural tract or ulcer, most commonly found in the anus and called an anal fissure.\n", "id": "372131", "title": "Fissure"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17545275", "text": "List of instruments used in forensics\n\nInstruments used in Forensics, including \nautopsy dissections are as follows:\n\nSerological, chemical and genetic testings are done by the respective \npeople of these branches.\n", "id": "17545275", "title": "List of instruments used in forensics"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18311517", "text": "List of instruments used in anatomy\n\nInstruments used in Anatomy dissections are as follows:\n", "id": "18311517", "title": "List of instruments used in anatomy"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18421030", "text": "Prosection\n\nA prosection is the dissection of a cadaver (human or animal) or part of a cadaver by an experienced anatomist in order to demonstrate for students anatomic structure. In a dissection, students learn by doing; in a prosection, students learn by either observing a dissection being performed by an experienced anatomist or examining a specimen that has already been dissected by an experienced anatomist (etymology: Latin pro- \"before\" + sectio \"a cutting\")\n\nA prosection may also refer to the dissected cadaver or cadaver part which is then reassembled and provided to students for review.\n\nProsections are used primarily in the teaching of anatomy in disciplines as varied as human medicine, chiropractic, veterinary medicine, and physical therapy. Prosections may also be used to teach surgical techniques (such as the suturing of skin), pathology, physiology, reproduction medicine and theriogenology, and other topics.\n\nThe use of the prosection teaching technique is somewhat controversial in medicine. In the teaching of veterinary medicine, the goal is to \"create the best quality education ... while ensuring that animals are not used harmfully and that respect for animal life is engendered within the student.\" Others have concluded that dissections and prosections have a negative impact on students' respect for patients and human life. Some scholars argue that while actual hands-on experience is essential, alternatives such as plastinated or freeze-dried cadavers are just as effective in the teaching of anatomy while dramatically reducing the number of cadavers or cadaver parts needed. Other alternatives such as instructional videos, plastic models, and printed materials also exist. Some studies find them equally effective as dissection or prosections, and some schools of human medicine in the United States have abandoned the use of cadavers entirely. But others question the usefulness of these alternatives, arguing dissection or prosection of cadavers are required for in-depth learning and teach skills alternatives cannot. Some scholars and teachers go so far as to argue that cadavers and prosections are irreplaceable in the teaching of medicine.\n\nWhether prosections are as effective as dissections in the teaching of medicine is also an unsettled aspect of medical education. Some have concluded that prosections are equally effective. However, others argue that the use of prosections is not as effective, and that dissections help students learn about \"detached concern,\" better understand medical uncertainty, and allow teachers to raise moral issues about death and dying. \n\nBut some academics conclude that the effectiveness of prosections versus dissection or other alternatives depends on the type of anatomy or the discipline being taught (e.g., anatomy versus pathology), that the teaching of anatomy is not yet well-enough understood, and that existing studies are too narrow or limited to draw conclusions.\n", "id": "18421030", "title": "Prosection"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9018702", "text": "Posterior compartment of thigh\n\nThe posterior compartment of the thigh is one of the fascial compartments that contains the knee flexors and hip extensors known as the hamstring muscles, as well as vascular and nervous elements, particularly the sciatic nerve.\n\nThe posterior compartment is a fascial compartment bounded by fascia. It is separated from the anterior compartment by two folds of deep fascia, known as the medial intermuscular septum and the lateral intermuscular septum.\n\nThe muscles of the posterior compartment of the thigh are the:\n\nThese muscles (or their tendons) apart from the short head of the biceps femoris, are commonly known as the hamstrings. The depression at the back of the knee, or \"kneepit\" is the popliteal fossa, colloquially called the \"ham\". The tendons of the above muscles can be felt as prominent cords on both sides of the fossa—the biceps femoris tendon on the lateral side and the semimembranosus and semitendinosus tendons on the medial side. The hamstrings flex the knee, and aided by the gluteus maximus, they extend the hip during walking and running. The semitendinosus is named for its unusually long tendon. The semimembranosus is named for the flat shape of its superior attachment.\n\nThe hamstrings are innervated by the sciatic nerve, specifically by a main branch of it: the tibial nerve. (The short head of the biceps femoris is innervated by the common fibular nerve). The sciatic nerve runs along the longitudinal axis of the compartment, giving the cited terminal branches close to the superior angle of the popliteal fossa.\n\nThe arteries that supply the posterior compartment of the thigh arise from the inferior gluteal and the perforating branches of the profunda femoris artery, a major collateral branch of the femoral artery and part of the anterior compartment of thigh. The femoral artery itself crosses the adductor hiatus to enter the posterior compartment at the level of the popliteal fossa, giving branches that supply the knee. This crossing marks the point in which the vessel changes its name to popliteal artery.\n\nAs with any other fascial compartment, the posterior compartment of thigh can develop compartment syndrome when pressure builds up inside it, reducing the ability of arteries to transport blood to muscles and nerves. In acute cases, this is most frequently a consequence of trauma.\n\n\n", "id": "9018702", "title": "Posterior compartment of thigh"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15338107", "text": "Deep transverse fascia\n\nThe deep transverse fascia or transverse intermuscular septum of leg is a transversely placed, intermuscular septum, from the deep fascia, between the superficial and deep muscles of the back of the leg.\n\nAt the sides it is connected to the margins of the tibia and fibula.\n\nAbove, where it covers the popliteus, it is thick and dense, and receives an expansion from the tendon of the semimembranosus. It is thinner in the middle of the leg; but below, where it covers the tendons passing behind the malleoli, it is thickened and continuous with the laciniate ligament.\n\n", "id": "15338107", "title": "Deep transverse fascia"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4784672", "text": "Greater sciatic foramen\n\nThe greater sciatic foramen is an opening (foramen) at the back of the human pelvis. It is formed by the sacrotuberous and sacrospinous ligaments. The piriformis muscle passes through the foramen and occupies most of its volume. The greater sciatic foramen is wider in women than in men.\n\nIt is bounded as follows:\n\nThe piriformis, which exits the pelvis through the foramen, occupies most of its volume.\n\nThe following structures also exit the pelvis through the greater sciatic foramen:\n\nThe foramen contains:\n\n\n", "id": "4784672", "title": "Greater sciatic foramen"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9073015", "text": "Triangular interval\n\nThe triangular interval (also known as the lateral triangular space, lower triangular space, and triceps hiatus) is a space found in the axilla.\n\nTwo of its borders are as follows:\n\nSome sources state the lateral border is the humerus, while others define it as the lateral head of the triceps. (The effective difference is relatively minor, though.)\n\nThe radial nerve is visible through the triangular interval, on its way to the posterior compartment of the arm.\nProfunda Brachii also passes through the triangular interval from anterior to posterior.\n\nTriangular Interval Syndrome (TIS) was described as a differential diagnosis for radicular pain in the upper extremity. It is a condition where the radial nerve is entrapped in the triangular interval resulting in upper extremity radicular pain. The radial nerve and profunda brachii pass through the triangular interval and are hence vulnerable. The triangular interval has a potential for compromise secondary alterations in thickness of the teres major and triceps. It is described based on cadaveric studies that fibrous bands were commonly present between the teres major and triceps. When these bands were present, rotation of the shoulder caused a reduction in cross sectional area of the space. Normal resting postures of humeral adduction and internal rotation with scapular protraction may be speculated as a precedent for teres major contractures owing to the shortened position of this muscle in this position. In addition, hypertrophy of this muscle can occur secondary to weight training and potentially compromise the triangular interval with resultant entrapment of the radial nerve. Shoulder dysfunctions have a potential for shortening and hypertrophy of the teres major. Shoulders that exhibit stiffness, secondary to capsular tightness, contribute to contracture and hypertrophy of the teres major. Hence, restricted external rotation can encourage adaptive shortening and thickening of the internal rotators of the shoulder principally the teres major and subscapularis. One may speculate that the lateral arm pain presented in shoulder dysfunctions may be of a nerve origin secondary to adverse neural tension of the radial nerve. The triceps brachii has a potential to entrap the radial nerve in the triangular interval secondary to hypertrophy. The presence of a fibrous arch in the long head and lateral head further complicates the situation. Repeated forceful extension seen in weight training and sport involving punching may be a precedent to this scenario. The radial nerve is vulnerable as it passes through this space, for all of the reasons mentioned above.\n\n\n", "id": "9073015", "title": "Triangular interval"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4507232", "text": "Adductor canal\n\nThe adductor canal (subsartorial or Hunter’s canal) is an aponeurotic tunnel in the middle third of the thigh, extending from the apex of the femoral triangle to the opening in the adductor magnus, the adductor hiatus.\n\nIt courses between the anterior compartment of thigh and the medial compartment of thigh, and has the following boundaries:\n\n\nIt is covered in by a strong aponeurosis which extends from the vastus medialis, across the femoral vessels to the adductor longus and magnus.\n\n\nThe canal contains the superficial femoral artery, femoral vein, and branches of the femoral nerve (specifically, the saphenous nerve, and the nerve to the vastus medialis). The femoral artery with its vein and the saphenous nerve enter this canal through the superior foramen. Then, the saphenous nerve and artery and vein of genus descendens exit through the anterior foramen, piercing the vastoadductor intermuscular septum. Finally, the femoral artery and vein exit via the inferior foramen (usually called the hiatus) through the inferior space between the oblique and medial heads of adductor magnus.\nThe eponym 'Hunter’s canal' is named for John Hunter.\n\n", "id": "4507232", "title": "Adductor canal"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15887272", "text": "Hiatus (anatomy)\n\nIn anatomy, a hiatus is a natural fissure in a structure. Examples include:\n", "id": "15887272", "title": "Hiatus (anatomy)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20451156", "text": "Conjugate eye movement\n\nConjugate eye movement refers to motor coordination of the eyes that allows for bilateral fixation on a single object. Several centers in the brainstem are involved. Horizontal conjugate gaze is controlled by the nuclei of CN III and CN VI, the paramedian pontine reticular formation, and the nucleus prepositus hypoglossi-medial vestibular nucleus. Vertical conjugate gaze is controlled by the nuclei of CN III and CN IV, the rostral interstitial nucleus of medial longitudinal fasciculus (riMLF), and the interstitial nucleus of Cajal.\n", "id": "20451156", "title": "Conjugate eye movement"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20852803", "text": "Salpinx in anatomy\n\nIn anatomical contexts, salpinx is used to refer to a type of tube. Per Terminologia Anatomica, the Latin term \"tuba\" is usually used to describe most tubes (after the Roman tuba, not the modern Tuba), but the term \"salpinges\" and its adjectival derivatives are still sometimes used to describe the following two \"tubes\":\n\n", "id": "20852803", "title": "Salpinx in anatomy"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=996317", "text": "Fetal position\n\nFetal position (British English: also foetal) is the positioning of the body of a prenatal fetus as it develops. In this position, the back is curved, the head is bowed, and the limbs are bent and drawn up to the torso. \n\nThis position is used in the medical profession to minimize injury to the neck and chest. \n\nSometimes, when a person has suffered extreme physical or psychological trauma (including massive stress), they will assume the fetal position or a similar position in which the back is curved forward, the legs are brought up as tightly against the abdomen as possible, the head is bowed as close to the abdomen as possible, and the arms are wrapped around the head to prevent further trauma. This position provides better protection to the brain and vital organs than simply lying spread out on the ground, so it is clear as to why it is an instinctual reaction to extreme stress or trauma when the brain is no longer able to cope with the surrounding environment, and in essence \"shuts down\" temporarily.\n\nThe fetal position has been observed in drug addicts, who enter the position when experiencing withdrawal. Sufferers of anxiety are also known to assume the fetal position during panic attacks.\n\nMany people assume this position when sleeping, especially when the body becomes cold.\n\nA study by Professor Chris Idzikowski, director of the Sleep Assessment and Advisory Service found that people who sleep in the fetal position consistently tend to have a shy and sensitive personality.\n\nAssuming this position and playing dead is often recommended as a strategy to end a bear attack.\n\nMany baby mammals, especially rodents, remain in the fetal position well after being born.\n\nThe fetal position is also one of the most comfortable and familiar positions to the human, as they remain in the position for the last two trimesters of pregnancy. Babies are most often found stretched out, however, because they do not have full control of their limbs, resulting in flailing and twitching.\n\n", "id": "996317", "title": "Fetal position"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20653077", "text": "Subpulmonic effusion\n\nA subpulmonic effusion is excess fluid that collects at the base of the lung, in the space between the pleura and diaphragm. It is a type of pleural effusion in which the fluid collects in this particular space, but can be \"layered out\" with decubitus chest radiographs. There is minimal nature of costophrenic angle blunting usually found with larger pleural effusions. The occult nature of the effusion can be suspected indirectly on radiograph by elevation of the right diaphragmatic border with a lateral peak and medial flattening. The presence of the gastric bubble on the left with an abnormalagm of more than 2 cm can also suggest the diagnosis. Lateral decubitus views, with the patient lying on their side, can confirm the effusion as it will layer along the lateral chest wall.also subpulmonic space-this refers to the space below the lungs in which the subpulmonic fluid fills.subpulmonic fluid are common particularly in trauma cases where the apparent hemidiaphragm appears defieted and the apex is displaced laterally. \n", "id": "20653077", "title": "Subpulmonic effusion"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=322555", "text": "Ectasia\n\nEctasia (), also called ectasis (), is dilation or distention of a tubular structure, either normal or pathophysiologic, but usually the latter (except in atelectasis, where absence of ectasis is the problem).\n\n\n", "id": "322555", "title": "Ectasia"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=934991", "text": "Body proportions\n\nWhile there is significant variation in anatomical proportions between people, there are many references to body proportions that are intended to be canonical, either in art, measurement, or medicine.\n\nIn measurement, body proportions are often used to relate two or more measurements based on the body. A cubit, for instance, is supposed to be six palms. A span is taken to be 9 inches and was previously considered as half a cubit. While convenient, these ratios may not reflect the physiognomic variation of the individuals using them.\n\nSimilarly, in art, body proportions are the study of relation of human or animal body parts to each other and to the whole. These ratios are used in veristic depictions of the figure, and also become part of an aesthetic canon within a culture.\n\nIt is important in figure drawing to draw the human figure in proportion. Though there are subtle differences between individuals, human proportions fit within a fairly standard range, though artists have historically tried to create idealised standards, which have varied considerably over different periods and regions. In modern figure drawing, the basic unit of measurement is the 'head', which is the distance from the top of the head to the chin. This unit of measurement is reasonably standard, and has long been used by artists to establish the proportions of the human figure. Ancient Egyptian art used a canon of proportion based on the \"fist\", measured across the knuckles, with 18 fists from the ground to the hairline on the forehead. This was already established by the Narmer Palette from about the 31st century BC, and remained in use until at least the conquest by Alexander the Great some 3,000 years later.\n\nThe proportions used in figure drawing are:\n\n\nA study using Polish participants by Sorokowski found 5% longer legs than an individual used as a reference was considered most attractive. The study concluded this preference might stem from the influence of leggy runway models. The Sorokowski study was criticized for using a picture of the same person with digitally altered leg lengths which Marco Bertamini felt were unrealistic.\n\nAnother study using British and American participants, found \"mid-ranging\" leg-to-body ratios to be most ideal.\n\nA study by Swami et al. of American men and women showed a preference for men with legs as long as the rest of their body and women with 40% longer legs than the rest of their body The researcher concluded that this preference might be influenced by American culture where long-legged women are portrayed as more attractive. The Swami et al. study was criticized for using a picture of the same person with digitally altered leg lengths which Marco Bertamini felt were unrealistic. Bertamini also criticized the Swami study for only changing the leg length while keeping the arm length constant. Bertamini's own study which used stick figures mirrored Swami's study, however, by finding a preference for leggier women.\n\nAnother common measurement of related to leg-to-body ratio is sitting-height ratio (SHR). Sitting height ratio is the ratio of the head plus spine length to total height which is highly correlated to leg-to-body ratio. SHR has been found to be very different between individuals of different ancestry. It has been reported that individuals with African ancestry have on average longer leg length, i.e. lower SHR than individuals of European ancestry. A study in 2015 revealed that this difference is mainly due to genetic differences and the SHR difference between African and European individuals is as large as 1 standard deviation.\n\nA 1999 study found that \"the (action) figures have grown much more muscular over time, with many contemporary figures far exceeding the muscularity of even the largest human bodybuilders,\" reflecting an American cultural ideal of a super muscular man. Also, female dolls reflect the cultural ideal of thinness in women.\n\nThe ancient Greek sculptor Polykleitos (c.450–420 BC), known for his ideally proportioned bronze \"Doryphoros\", wrote an influential \"Canon\" describing the proportions to be followed in sculpture. \nThe \"Canon\" applies the basic mathematical concepts of Greek geometry, such as the ratio, proportion, and \"symmetria\" (Greek for \"harmonious proportions\") creating a system capable of describing the human form through a series of continuous geometric progressions. Polykleitos uses the distal phalanx of the little finger as the basic module for determining the proportions of the human body, scaling this length up repeatedly by √2 to obtain the ideal size of the other phalanges, the hand, forearm, and upper arm in turn.\n\nLeonardo da Vinci believed that the ideal human proportions were determined by the harmonious proportions that he believed governed the universe, such that the ideal man would fit cleanly into a circle as depicted in his famed drawing of \"Vitruvian man\".\n\n\n\n", "id": "934991", "title": "Body proportions"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=330303", "text": "Zygoma\n\nThe term zygoma generally refers to the zygomatic bone, a bone of the human skull commonly referred to as the cheekbone or malar bone, but it may also refer to:\n\n\n", "id": "330303", "title": "Zygoma"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=227504", "text": "Septum\n\nIn biology, a septum (Latin for \"something that encloses\"; plural septa) is a wall, dividing a cavity or structure into smaller ones.\n\n\nHistological septa are seen throughout most tissues of the body, particularly where they are needed to stiffen soft cellular tissue, and they also provide planes of ingress for small blood vessels. Because the dense collagen fibres of a septum usually extend out into the softer adjacent tissues, microscopic fibrous septa are less clearly defined than the macroscopic types of septa listed above. In rare instances, a septum is a cross-wall. Thus it divides a structure into smaller parts.\n\nThe Septum (cell biology) is the boundary formed between dividing cells in the course of cell division.\n\n\n\n\n", "id": "227504", "title": "Septum"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7242577", "text": "Potential space\n\nIn anatomy, a potential space is a space that can occur between two adjacent structures that are normally pressed together. The pleural cavity, between the visceral and parietal pleura of the lung, is sometimes referred to as a potential space although, strictly speaking, it contains some fluid and is therefore an actual space, albeit a small one.\n\n\n1. \n", "id": "7242577", "title": "Potential space"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6254939", "text": "Hilton's law\n\nHilton's law, espoused by John Hilton in a series of medical lectures given in 1860–1862, is the observation that in the study of anatomy, the nerve supplying the muscles extending directly across and acting at a given joint also innervate the joint.\n\nFor example, the musculocutaneous nerve supplies the elbow joint of humans with pain and proprioception fibres. It also supplies coracobrachialis, biceps brachii, brachialis, and the forearm skin close to the insertion of each of those muscles.\nHilton's law arises as a result of the embryological development of humans (or indeed other animals). Hilton based his law upon his extensive anatomical knowledge and clinical experiences. As with most British surgeons of his day (1805–1878), he intensely studied anatomy.\n\nHilton's law is described above. Similar observations can be made, to extend the theory; often a nerve will supply \"both\" the muscles and skin relating to a particular joint. The observation often holds true in reverse - that is to say, a nerve that supplies skin or a muscle will often supply the applicable joint.\n\n\nOrthopedics By Leonard F. Peltier, pg 122\n", "id": "6254939", "title": "Hilton's law"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25260733", "text": "Apical delta\n\nApical delta refers to the branching pattern of small accessory canals and minor foramina seen at the tip or apex of some tooth roots.\nThe pattern is said to be reminiscent of a river delta when sectioned and viewed using a microscope. Because the anatomy of this area is very small and complex with several portals of entry to the root canal i.e. more than one apical foramen this may make successful endodontic treatment less likely.\n\nThe root tip is removed during apicoectomy to eliminate the apical delta and maximise the chance of successful healing.\n\nColor Atlas and Textbook of Oral Anatomy, Histology, and Embryology\nby B. K. Berkovitz, G. R. Holland, B. J. Moxham\nHardcover, Mosby, (0-8151-0697-1)\n", "id": "25260733", "title": "Apical delta"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=314028", "text": "Body orifice\n\nA body orifice is any opening in the body of an animal.\n\nIn a typical mammalian body such as the human body, the external body orifices are:\n\nOther animals may have some other body orifices:\n\nInternal orifices include the orifices of the outflow tracts of the heart, between the heart valves.\n\n", "id": "314028", "title": "Body orifice"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2104661", "text": "Lamina (anatomy)\n\nLamina is a general anatomical term meaning \"plate\" or \"layer.\" It is used in both gross anatomy and microscopic anatomy to describe structures.\n\nSome examples include:\n\n", "id": "2104661", "title": "Lamina (anatomy)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1884747", "text": "Cortex (anatomy)\n\nIn anatomy and zoology, the cortex (Latin for bark, rind, shell or husk) is the outermost (or superficial) layer of an organ. Organs with well-defined cortical layers include kidneys, adrenal glands, ovaries, the thymus, and portions of the brain, including the cerebral cortex, the best-known of all cortices.\n\n\nThe cerebral cortex is typically described as comprising three parts: the sensory, motor, and association areas. These sensory areas receive and process information from the senses. The senses of vision, audition, and touch are served by the primary visual cortex, primary auditory cortex and primary somatosensory cortex. The cerebellar cortex is the thin gray surface layer of the cerebellum, consisting of an outer molecular layer or stratum moleculare, a single layer of Purkinje cells (the ganglionic layer), and an inner granular layer or stratum granulosum. The cortex is the outer surface of the cerebrum and is composed of gray matter.\n\nThe motor areas are located in both hemispheres of the cerebral cortex. Two areas of the cortex are commonly referred to as motor: the primary motor cortex, which executes voluntary movements, and; the supplementary motor areas and premotor cortex, which \"select\" voluntary movements. In addition, motor functions have been attributed to: the posterior parietal cortex, which guides voluntary movements, and; the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, which decides which voluntary movements to make according to higher-order instructions, rules, and self-generated thoughts.\n", "id": "1884747", "title": "Cortex (anatomy)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3775212", "text": "Segmental analysis (biology)\n\nSegmental analysis is a method of anatomical analysis for describing the connective morphology of the human body. Instead of describing anatomy in terms of spatial relativity, as in the anatomical position method, segmental analysis describes anatomy in terms of which organs, tissues, etc. connect to each other, and the characteristics of those connections.\n\n", "id": "3775212", "title": "Segmental analysis (biology)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3694423", "text": "Joint capsule\n\nIn anatomy, a joint capsule or articular capsule is an envelope surrounding a synovial joint. Each joint capsule has two parts: an outer fibrous layer or membrane, and an inner synovial layer or membrane.\n\nEach capsule consists of two layers or membranes:\n\nOn the inside of the capsule, articular cartilage covers the end surfaces of the bones that articulate within that joint.\n\nThe outer layer is highly innervated by the same nerves which perforate through the adjacent muscles associated with the joint.\n\nThe fibrous membrane of the joint capsule is attached to the whole circumference of the articular end of each bone entering into the joint, and thus entirely surrounds the articulation. It is made up of dense irregular connective tissue.\n\nFrozen shoulder (adhesive capsulitis) is a disorder in which the shoulder capsule becomes inflamed.\n\nPlica syndrome is a disorder in which the synovial plica becomes inflamed and causes abnormal biomechanics in the knee.\n\n", "id": "3694423", "title": "Joint capsule"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26595236", "text": "Pan American Association of Anatomy\n\nThe Pan American Association of Anatomy (PAA) is a public, nonprofit, scientific organization that brings together professionals engaged in the study of Anatomy and related sciences in the American continent.\n\nThe Pan American Association of Anatomy (PAA) was created in July 1966 in Mexico City at the 1st Pan American Congress of Anatomy, which was held together with the 3rd National Congress of the Mexican Society of Anatomy. Its mentor was the Prof. Dr. Liberato J. A. Didio.\n\nThe need for a Pan American Association of Anatomy was proposed by Prof. Di Dio during the 74th meeting of the American Association of Anatomy held in Chicago, USA, in March 1961.\n\nIts objectives include stimulating the development and improvement of teaching and research of morphological sciences on the American continent, facilitating scientific exchange in all its aspects. Since then and through its meetings, it has spread and updated progress of morphological sciences on the American continent.\n\nThe PAA is a member of the International Federation of Associations of Anatomists (IFAA).\n\nThe Government of the Pan American Association of Anatomy consists on the General Assembly (performed with partners in the Congress), the Board of Directors (composed by advisers or delegates from each country) and the Executive Committee (headed by the President, who is elected by the General Assembly).\n\nThere are two counselors or delegates for each American country concerned; one as owner and another alternate.\n\nWhen the mandate of the President of the Executive Committee is finished, he is named Honorary President of the Association and he automatically joins the Honorary Presidents Committee of the PAA, which works with the Executive Committee.\n\nThe headquarters of the congresses vary from one congress to another, but they are always within the Americas and in a rotative form. The designation of the host country is resolved at the General Assembly by a vote of its partners and it is usually held every 3 years.\n\nSince 2013, the Association Executive Committee has been chaired by Prof. Dr. Manuel Arteaga Martínez, from Mexico (2013–2017). The next Pan-American Congress of Anatomy will be held in Peru, 2017; its President is Prof. Dr. Germán Molina Albornoz, from Peru.\n\nThe statutes of the Association and the Pan American Congress of Anatomy, adopted by majority vote by the General Assembly of the Association, can be found on the.\n\nIn 50 years of Association life, 18 congresses have been held, with an interval of 3 years (sometimes 2 years) between them. The following countries have hosted at least one congress: Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Costa Rica, Chile, Mexico, Peru, Uruguay, USA and Venezuela.\n\nThe Congress covers various topics of morphological sciences and related sciences that have application to the biology and health sciences, especially in medicine and dentistry. It involves research, teaching and medical care. In particular, issues related to development anatomy (embryology), microscopic anatomy (histology and Citology), human anatomy, veterinary anatomy, comparative anatomy, neuroanatomy, neurobiology, radiological anatomy, clinical anatomy, anthropology, biophysics and biochemistry, etc. are discussed.\n\nIn 2009, during the 43rd anniversary of the Pan American Association of Anatomy, the 1st Iberian-Latin-American Terminology Symposium (SILAT) was held, with the purpose of disseminating the International Morphological Terminology. Educational institutions of medical and other health areas which spoke Spanish and Portuguese used it on a daily basis. Its mentor was Prof. Dr. Rolando Cruz Gutiérrez.\n\nUp today, there have been fourteen symposia: four in Costa Rica, two in Brasil, three in Mexico, three in Chile, one in Peru and one in Nicaragua. In these symposia, participants are divided into groups to work with the anatomical, histological and embryological terminology from the Terminology Committee (FICAT) of the International Federation of Associations of Anatomists (IFAA). Meetings are held every day. The symposia also develops the presentation of free papers concerning different aspects and considerations of terminology.\n\nThese groups of experts review, analyse and discuss the morphological terms; possible errors and defects in the studied structures are also discussed. It was determined that the future meetings are planned in other countries (such as Honduras, Ecuador, Argentina, etc.).\n\nThe PAA has the support of various magazines, which are the official organ of publication, showing summaries of scientific congresses communications and other aspects. They are: International Journal of Morphology (Revista Internacional de Morfología), Brazilian Journal of Morphology Sciences, Venezuelan Magazine of Morphological Sciences and Medical Journal of Costa Rica and Central America.\n\nHeadquarters, dates and presidencies:\n\nHeadquarters, dates and presidencies:\n\n\n \n\n", "id": "26595236", "title": "Pan American Association of Anatomy"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26635074", "text": "Axillary lines\n\nThe axillary lines are the anterior axillary line, midaxillary line and the posterior axillary line.\n\nThe anterior axillary line \nis a coronal line on the anterior torso marked by the anterior axillary fold. It's the imaginary line that runs down from the point midway between the middle of the clavicle and the lateral end of the clavicle; the lateral end of the collarbone is the end closer to the arm.\n\nThe V ECG lead is placed on the anterior axillary line, horizontally even with V.\n\nThe midaxillary line is a coronal line on the torso between the anterior and posterior axillary lines.\n\nIt is a landmark used in thoracentesis, and the V6 electrode of the 10 electrode ECG.\n\nThe posterior axillary line is a coronal line on the posterior torso marked by the posterior axillary fold.\n\n\n", "id": "26635074", "title": "Axillary lines"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27397118", "text": "Endocochlear potential\n\nThe endocochlear potential (EP; also called endolymphatic potential) is the positive voltage of 80-100mV seen in the cochlear endolymphatic spaces.Within the cochlea the EP varies in the magnitude all along its length. When a sound is presented, the endocochlear potential changes either positive or negative in the endolymph, depending on the stimulus. The change in the potential is called the summating potential.\n\nWith the movement of the basilar membrane, a shear force is created and a small potential is generated due to a difference in potential between the endolymph (scala media- +80 mV) and the perilymph (vestibular and tympanic ducts- -70 mV). EP is highest in the basal turn of the Cochlea and decreases in the magnitude towards the apex. EP is highly dependent on the metabolism and ionic transport.\n\nAn acoustic stimulus produces a simultaneous change in conductance at the membrane of the receptor cell. Because there is a steep gradient (150 mV, changes in membrane conductance are accompanied by rapid influx and efflux of ions which in turn produce the receptor potential. This is known as the Battery Hypothesis. The receptor potential for each hair cell causes a release of neurotransmitter at its basal pole, which elicits excitation of the afferent nerve fibres. Research by Salt et al. 1987 revealed that the EP was generated by the basal cells of Stria Vascularis.\nreference: The Endocohlear Potential, Cochlear Fluids Lab, Washington University.\n", "id": "27397118", "title": "Endocochlear potential"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10387943", "text": "Geniculum\n\nA geniculum is a small \"genu\", or angular knee-like structure. It is often used in anatomical nomenclature to designate a sharp knee-like bend in a small structure or organ.\n\nFor example, in the facial canal, the genicular ganglion is situated on the \"geniculum\" of the facial nerve, the point where the nerve changes its direction.\n", "id": "10387943", "title": "Geniculum"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6139265", "text": "Triangle of auscultation\n\nThe triangle of auscultation of the lungs is a relative thinning of the musculature of the back, situated along the medial border of the scapula.\n\nIt has the following boundaries:\n\n\nThe superficial floor of the triangle is formed by the lateral portion of the erector spinae muscles. Deep to these muscles are the osseous portions of the 6th and 7th ribs and the internal and external intercostal muscles.\n\nTypically, the triangle of auscultation is covered by the scapula. To better expose the triangle and listen to respiratory sounds with a stethoscope, patients are asked to fold their arms across their chest, laterally rotating the scapulae, while bending forward at the trunk, somewhat resembling a fetal position.\n\nDue to the relative thinning of the musculature of the back in the triangle, the posterior thoracic wall is closer to the skin surface, making respiratory sounds able to be heard more clearly with a stethoscope.\n\nTo better expose the floor of the triangle up of the posterior thoracic wall in the 6th and 7th intercostal space, a patient is asked to fold their arms across their chest, laterally rotating the scapulae, while bending forward at the trunk.\n\n", "id": "6139265", "title": "Triangle of auscultation"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5125431", "text": "Crypt (anatomy)\n\nCrypts are anatomical structures that are narrow but deep invaginations into a larger structure.\n\nOne common type of anatomical crypt is the Crypts of Lieberkühn. However, it is not the only type: some types of tonsils also have crypts. Because these crypts allow external access to the deep portions of the tonsils, these tonsils are more vulnerable to infection.\n\n", "id": "5125431", "title": "Crypt (anatomy)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8480446", "text": "Midsternal line\n\nOn the front of the thorax, one of the most important vertical lines is the midsternal line, the middle line of the sternum.\n\nIt can be interpreted as a component of the median plane.\n\n", "id": "8480446", "title": "Midsternal line"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4890630", "text": "Intertubercular plane\n\nA lower transverse line midway between the upper transverse and the upper border of the pubic symphysis; this is termed the intertubercular plane (or transtubercular), since it practically corresponds to that passing through the iliac tubercles; behind, its plane cuts the body of the fifth lumbar vertebra.\n\n\n", "id": "4890630", "title": "Intertubercular plane"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14609794", "text": "Subcostal plane\n\nThe subcostal plane is a transverse plane which bisects the body at the level of the 10th costal margin and the vertebra body L3.\n\n", "id": "14609794", "title": "Subcostal plane"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24651965", "text": "Parasternal line\n\nThe parasternal line is a vertical line on the front of the thorax. It is midway between the lateral sternal and the mammary line.\n\n", "id": "24651965", "title": "Parasternal line"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24651881", "text": "Posterior median line\n\nThe posterior median line is a sagittal line on the posterior torso at the midline.\n\nA similar term is \"vertebral line\", which defined by the spinous processes. However, this term is not in Terminologia Anatomica.\n", "id": "24651881", "title": "Posterior median line"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24534409", "text": "Scapular line\n\nThe scapular line, also known as the linea scapularis, is a vertical line passing through the inferior angle of the scapula.\n\nIt has been used in the evaluation of brachial plexus birth palsy.\n\n", "id": "24534409", "title": "Scapular line"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13838905", "text": "Spatium\n\nIn anatomy, a spatium or anatomic space is a space (cavity or gap). Anatomic spaces are often landmarks to find other important structures. When they fill with gases (such as air) or liquids (such as blood) in pathological ways, they can suffer conditions such as pneumothorax, edema, or pericardial effusion. Many anatomic spaces are potential spaces, which means that they are potential rather than realized (with their realization being dynamic according to physiologic or pathophysiologic events). In other words, they are like an empty plastic bag that has not been opened (two walls collapsed against each other; no interior volume until opened) or a balloon that has not been inflated.\n\nExamples of anatomic spaces (or potential spaces) include:\n\n\n", "id": "13838905", "title": "Spatium"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21483658", "text": "Subinvolution\n\nSubinvolution is a medical condition in which after childbirth, the uterus does not return to its normal size.\n\nWhen the involution is impaired or retarded it is called subinvolution. The uterus is the most common organ affected by subinvolution. As it is the most accessible organ to be measured per abdomen, the uterine involution is considered clinically as an index to assess subinvolution. \n\n\n\n\nThe condition may be asymptomatic. The predominant symptoms are: \n\n1. The uterine height is greater than the normal for the particular day of puerperium. Normal puerperal uterus may be displaced by a full bladder or a loaded rectum. It feels boggy and softer upon palpation.\n2. Presence of features responsible for subinvolution may be evident.\n\n\n", "id": "21483658", "title": "Subinvolution"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14269754", "text": "Terminal web\n\nThe terminal web is a filamentous structure found at the apical surface of epithelial cells that possess microvilli. It is composed primarily of actin filaments stabilized by spectrin, which also anchors the terminal web to the apical cell membrane. The presence of myosin II and tropomyosin helps to explain the contractile ability of the terminal web. When contracted, the terminal web causes a decrease in diameter of the apex of the cell, causing the microvilli, which are anchored into the terminal web through their stiff actin fibers, to spread apart. This spreading apart of the microvilli aids cells in absorption.\n", "id": "14269754", "title": "Terminal web"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2948561", "text": "Precordium\n\nIn anatomy, the precordium or praecordium is the portion of the body over the heart and lower chest.\n\nDefined anatomically, it is the area of the anterior chest wall over the heart. It is therefore usually on the left side, except in conditions like dextrocardia, where the individual's heart is on the right side. In such a case, the precordium is on the right side as well.\n\nThe precordium is naturally a cardiac area of dullness. During examination of the chest, the percussion note will therefore be dull. In fact, this area only gives a resonant percussion note in hyperinflation, emphysema or tension pneumothorax. \nPrecordial chest pain can be an indication of a variety of illnesses, including costochondritis and viral pericarditis.\n\n", "id": "2948561", "title": "Precordium"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3732474", "text": "Endocast\n\nAn endocast is the internal cast of a hollow object, often referring to the cranial vault in the study of brain development in humans and other organisms. Endocasts can be artificially made for examining the properties of a hollow, inaccessible space, or they may occur naturally through fossilization.\n\nEndocasts of the inside of the neurocranium (braincase) are often made in paleoanthropology to study brain structures and hemispheric specialization in extinct human ancestors. While an endocast can not directly reveal brain structure, it can allow scientists to gauge the size of areas of the brain situated close to the surface, notably Wernicke's and Broca's areas, responsible for interpreting and producing speech.\n\nTraditionally, the casting material is some form of rubber or rubber-like material. The openings to the brain cavity, except for the \"foramen magnum\", are closed, and the liquid rubber is slushed around in the empty cranial vault and then left to set. The resulting hollow sphere can then be drained of air like a balloon and pulled out through the \"foramen magnum\". Rubber endocasts like these were the standard practice until the end of the 20th century and are still used in some fields. However, scientists are increasingly utilizing computerized tomography scanning technology to create digital endocasts in order to avoid risking damage to valuable specimens.\n\nNatural cranial endocasts are also known. The famous Taung Child, the first \"Australopithecus\" found, consists of a natural endocast connected to the facial portion of the skull. It was the shape of the brain that allowed Raymond Dart to conclude that the fossil was that of a human relative rather than an extinct ape.\n\nMammal endocasts are particularly useful, as they resemble the fresh brain with the dura mater in place. Such \"fossil brains\" are known from several hundred different mammal species. More than a hundred natural cast of the cranial vault of \"Bathygenys\" (a small merycodont) alone are known, some having identifiable features down to the major gyri. Several hundred casts of various dinosaurs are known, among them a \"Tyrannosaurus\" brain vault, showing the animal had limited intelligence and a well-developed sense of smell. The oldest known natural cranial endocast is a fossil fish brain from a Holocephalan, some 300 million years old.\n\nEndocast fossils from animals with shells that easily disintegrate or dissolve can often be encountered free from their mold fossil, like the aragonite shells of certain molluscs and the tests of sea urchins. A frequently occurring form is the internal mold of brachiopods and bivalves. In the quite symmetrical genus brachiopod \"Pentamerus\", the endocast resembles a vulva, giving these fossils the name \"Schamstein\" or \"Mutterstein\" (\"shame stone\" or \"mother stone\") in German, while some bivalve endocasts are traditionally known as heart-of-stone or bull hearts in Britain. The \"Venus of Svinesund\", an early Mesolithic Venus figurine from Norway, is a re-worked Ordovician bivalve endocast. Endocasts are also known to develop from snail shells and sea urchins, and even from the stomach hollow of jellyfish, a group that rarely leaves fossil traces.\n\nArtificial endocasts are sometimes made from blood vessels for medical or anatomical reasons. The blood vessel of an organ (e.g. brain or liver) is injected with a resin. When it is set, the organ itself is dissolved, leaving a three-dimensional image of the blood supply to the organ.\n", "id": "3732474", "title": "Endocast"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30592279", "text": "Hilum (anatomy)\n\nIn human anatomy, the hilum (; plural hila), sometimes formerly called a hilus (; plural hili), is a depression or fissure where structures such as blood vessels and nerves enter an organ. Examples include:\n", "id": "30592279", "title": "Hilum (anatomy)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1751528", "text": "Rugae\n\nRugae is a term used in anatomy that refers to a series of ridges produced by folding of the wall of an organ. Most commonly the term is applied to the internal surface of the stomach (gastric rugae).\n\nThe purpose of the gastric rugae is to allow for expansion of the stomach after the consumption of foods and liquids.\n\nRugae can appear in the following locations in humans:\n\nRugae are only evident when an organ or tissue is deflated or relaxed. For example, rugae are evident within the stomach when it is deflated. However, when the stomach distends, the rugae unfold to allow for the increase in volume. On the other hand, plicae remain folded regardless of distension as is evident within the plicae of the small intestine walls.\n", "id": "1751528", "title": "Rugae"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9639798", "text": "Sinus (anatomy)\n\nA sinus is a sac or cavity in any organ or tissue, or an abnormal cavity or passage caused by the destruction of tissue. In common usage, \"sinus\" usually refers to the paranasal sinuses, which are air cavities in the cranial bones, especially those near the nose and connecting to it. Most individuals have four paired cavities located in the cranial bone or skull.\n\n\"Sinus\" is Latin for \"bay\", \"pocket\", \"curve\", or \"bosom\". In anatomy, the term is used in various contexts.\n\nThe word \"sinusitis\" is used to indicate that one or more of the membrane linings found in the sinus cavities has become inflamed or infected. It is however distinct from a fistula, which is a tract connecting two epithelial surfaces. If left untreated, infections occurring in the sinus cavities can affect the chest and lungs.\n\n\nThe four paired sinuses or air cavities can be referred to as:\n\nThe presence of sinus cavities within the cranial bone (skull) is essential for the following reasons:\n\nIf one or more of the paired paranasal sinuses or air cavities becomes inflamed, it leads to an infection called sinusitis. The term \"sinusitis\" means an inflammation of one or more of the sinus cavities. This inflammation causes an increase in internal pressure within these areas. The pressure is often experienced in the cheek area, eyes, nose, on one side of the head (temple areas), and can result in a severe headache.\n\nWhen diagnosing a sinus infection, one can identify which sinus cavity the infection is located in by the term given to the cavity. Ethmoiditis refers to an infection in the ethmoid sinus cavity/ies, frontal sinusitis refers to an infection occurring in the frontal sinus cavity/ies, antritis is used to refer to an infection in the maxillary sinus cavity/ies whilst spenoiditis refers to an infection in the sphenoid sinus cavity/ies.\n\nSinusitis can be acute, chronic or recurrent.\n\n\nA sinus infection can have a number of causes. Untreated allergies are one of the main contributing factors to the development of sinus infections. A person with a sinus infection often has nasal congestion with thick nasal secretions, fever, and cough (WebMD). Patients can be treated by “reducing the swelling or inflammation in the nasal passages and sinuses, eliminating the infection, promoting drainage from the sinuses, and maintaining open sinuses” (WebMD). Sinusitis can be treated with medications and can also be eliminated by surgery.\n\nAnother cause of sinus infections is a result of bacterial invasion within one or more of the sinus cavities. Any bacteria that enter the nasal passages and sinus cavities through the air that is inhaled, are trapped by the mucus secreted by the mucous membranes surrounding these areas. These trapped particles can cause an irritation to these linings resulting in swelling and inflammation. “Bacteria that normally cause acute sinusitis are Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and Moraxella catarrhalis (WebMD). These microorganisms, along with Staphylococcus aureus and some anaerobes (bacteria that live without oxygen), are involved in chronic sinusitis. (WebMD)” Fungi can also cause chronic sinusitis.\n\nCertain abnormalities or trauma related injuries to the nasal cavity can make it difficult for effective drainage of mucus from the sinus cavities. This mucus is then allowed to develop in these areas making the cavity an ideal area in which bacteria can both attach and thrive.\n\nSinusitis or sinus infections usually clear up if treated early and appropriately. Apart from complications, the outlook for acute bacterial sinusitis is good. People may develop chronic sinusitis or have recurrent attacks of acute sinusitis if they suffer with allergies or if they have any “structural or anatomical causes\" which predispose them to developing sinus infections.\n\nViral sinus infections do not however respond well to conventional treatments such as antibiotics. When treating fungal sinusitis, an appropriate fungicide is usually administered.\n\n", "id": "9639798", "title": "Sinus (anatomy)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11888655", "text": "Spongiosum\n\nSpongiosum is the Latin adjective for \"spongy\". The term is used in anatomy for tissues that become filled with blood: \"corpus spongiosum\", \"stratum spongiosum\" of the decidua. It is also used in binomial nomenclature of organisms, such as the seaweed \"Codium spongiosum\".\n", "id": "11888655", "title": "Spongiosum"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30963255", "text": "Underwood's septa\n\nIn anatomy, Underwood's septa (or maxillary sinus septa, singular septum) are fin-shaped projections of bone that may exist in the maxillary sinus, first described in 1910 by Arthur S. Underwood, an anatomist at King's College in London. The presence of septa at or near the floor of the sinus are of interest to the dental clinician when proposing or performing sinus floor elevation procedures because of an increased likelihood of surgical complications, such as tearing of the Schneiderian membrane.\n\nThe prevalence of Underwood's septa in relation to the floor of the maxillary sinus has been reported at nearly 32%.\n\nUnderwood divided the maxillary sinus into three regions relating to zones of distinct tooth eruption activity: anterior (corresponding to the premolars), middle (corresponding to the first molar) and posterior (corresponding to the second molar). Thus, he asserted, these septa always arise between teeth and never opposite the middle of a tooth.\n\nDifferent studies reveal a different predisposition for the presence of septa based on sinus region:\n\nRecent studies have classified two types of maxillary sinus septa: primary and secondary. \"Primary septa\" are those initially described by Underwood and that form as a result of the floor of the sinus sinking along with the roots of erupting teeth; these primary septa are thus generally found in the sinus corresponding to the space between teeth, as explained by Underwood. Conversely, \"secondary septa\" form as a result of irregular pneumatization of the sinus following loss of maxillary posterior teeth. \"Sinus pneumatization\" is a poorly understood phenomenon that results in an increased volume of the maxillary sinus, generally following maxillary posterior tooth loss, at the expense of the bone which used to house the roots of the maxillary posterior teeth.\n", "id": "30963255", "title": "Underwood's septa"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3028232", "text": "Topographical code\n\nIn medicine, \"topographical codes\" (or \"topography codes\") are codes that indicate a specific location in the body.\n\nOnly the first of these is a system dedicated only to topography. The others are more generalized systems that contain topographic axes.\n\n\n", "id": "3028232", "title": "Topographical code"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3343471", "text": "Corpora amylacea\n\nCorpora amylacea (CA) are small hyaline masses of unknown significance found in the prostate gland, neuroglia, and pulmonary alveoli. They are derived from degenerate cells or thickened secretions and occur more frequently with advancing age, and are particularly profuse in neurodegenerative diseases. While their significance is unknown, they can be used to identify these organs microscopically. A report published in 2017 suggests a role of debris clearance for the CA. This was described in an earlier report as a \"debris disposal system\".\n\nIn the brain, corpora amylacea are contained in foot processes of astrocytes and are usually present in sub-pial location and around blood vessels. In comparison to prostatic corpora amylacea, these are only faintly laminar and less eosinophilic. The major constituent has been shown to be amyloid in humans and the CA in other species are known as polyglucosan bodies. These bodies have no known pathologic correlation and can be confused with fungal yeast forms such as cryptococcus.\n\nIn the prostate, where they are also known as prostatic concretions, they usually appear in benign glands; however, their presence cannot be used to exclude cancer.\n", "id": "3343471", "title": "Corpora amylacea"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5157506", "text": "Supine position\n\nThe supine position ( or ) means lying horizontally with the face and torso facing up, as opposed to the prone position, which is face down. When used in surgical procedures, it allows access to the peritoneal, thoracic and pericardial regions; as well as the head, neck and extremities.\n\nUsing anatomical terms of location, the dorsal side is down, and the ventral side is up, when supine.\nIn scientific literature \"semi-supine\" commonly refers to positions where the upper body is tilted (at 45° or variations) and not completely horizontal.\n\nThe decline in death due to sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) is said to be attributable to having babies sleep in the supine position. It is believed that in the prone position babies are more at risk to re-breathe their own carbon dioxide. Because of the immature state of their central chemoreceptors, infants do not respond to the subsequent respiratory acidosis that develops.\n\nObstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is a form of sleep apnea that occurs more frequently and is most severe when individuals are sleeping in the supine position. Studies and evidence show that OSA related to sleeping in the supine position is related to the airway positioning, reduced lung volume, and the inability of airway muscles to dilate enough to compensate as the airway collapses. With individuals who have OSA, many health care providers encourage their patients to avoid the supine position while asleep and sleep laterally or sleep with the head of their bed up in a 30 or 45 degree angle.\n\n", "id": "5157506", "title": "Supine position"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6985504", "text": "Triangular fibrocartilage\n\nThe Triangular fibrocartilage complex (TFCC) is formed by the triangular fibrocartilage discus (TFC), the radioulnar ligaments (RUL’s) and the ulnocarpal ligaments (UCL’s).\n\nThe TFC is an articular discus that lies on the pole of the distal ulna. It has a triangular shape and a biconcave body; the periphery is thicker than its center. The central portion of the TFC is thin and consists of chondroid fibrocartilage; this type of tissue is often seen in structures that can bear compressive loads. This central area is often so thin that it is translucent and in some cases it is even absent. The peripheral portion of the TFC is well vascularised, while the central portion has no blood supply.\n\nThis discus is attached by thick tissue to the base of the ulnar styloid and by thinner tissue to the edge of the radius just proximal to the radiocarpal articular surface.\n\nThe RUL’s are the principal stabilizers of the distal radioulnar joint (DRUJ). There are two RUL's, the palmar and dorsal radioulnar ligaments.\n\nThese ligaments arise from the distal radius medial border and insert on the ulna at two separate and distinct sites: the ulna styloid and the fovea (a groove that separates the ulnar styloid from the ulnar head). Each ligament consists of a superficial component and a deep component. The superficial components insert directly onto the ulna styloid. The deep components insert more lateral, into the fovea adjacent to the articular surface of the pole of the distal ulna.\n\nThe ligaments are composed of longitudinally oriented lamellar collagen to resist tensile loads and have a rich vascular supply to allow healing.\n\nThe UCL’s consist of the ulnolunate and the ulnotriquetral ligaments. They originate from the ulnar styloid and insert into the carpal bones of the wrist: the ulnolunate ligament inserts into the lunate bone and the ulnotriquetral ligament into the triquetrum bone. These ligaments prevent dorsal migration of the distal ulna. They are more taut during supination, because in supination ulnar styloid moves away from the carpal bones volar side.\n\nThe primary functions of the TFCC:\n\nThe TFCC is important in load transmission across the ulnar aspect of the wrist. The TFC transmits and absorbs compressive forces.\n\nThe ulnar variance influences the amount of load that is transmitted through the distal ulna. The load transmission is directly proportional to this ulnar variance. In neutral ulnar variance, approximately 20 percent of the load is transmitted. With negative ulnar variance, the load across the TFC is decreased. This occurs during supination, because the radius moves distally on the ulna and creates a negative ulnar variance. With positive ulnar variance it is reversed. The load that is transmitted across the TFC is then increased. This positive ulnar variance occurs during pronation.\n\nThe TFCC is a major stabilizer of the DRUJ. To control the forearm rotation the DRUJ acts in concert with the proximal radioulnar joint. The connection between the distal radius and the distal ulna, maintain the congruency of the DRUJ. This attachment is mainly created by the RUL’s of the TFCC. These ligaments support the joint through its arc of rotation.\n\nThe role of the TFCC in supination and in pronation is a matter of dispute. Some authors (Schuind \"et al.\") concluded that the dorsal fibers of the TFCC tighten in pronation, and the palmar fibers in supination. These conclusions are opposite of those published by Af Ekenstam and Hagert.\n\nBoth parties are in fact right, as the RUL's consists of two ligaments each made of another two components: the superficial and the deep ligaments. During supination, the superficial palmar and the deep dorsal ligaments are tightened, preventing palmar translation of the ulna. In pronation this is reversed: the superficial dorsal and the deep palmar ligaments are tightened and prevent dorsal translation of the ulna.\n\nThe TFCC has a substantial risk for injury and degeneration because of its anatomic complexity and multiple functions.\n\nApplication of an extension-pronation force to an axial-load wrist, such as in a fall on an outstretched hand, causes most of the traumatic injuries of the TFCC.\n\nDorsal rotation injury, such as when a drill binds and rotates the wrist instead of the bit, can also cause traumatic injuries.\n\nInjury may also occur from a distraction force applied to the volar forearm or wrist. Finally tears of the TFCC are frequently found by patients with distal radius fractures.\n\nPerforations and defects in the TFCC are not all traumatic. There is an age related correlation with lesions in the TFCC, but many of these defects are asymptomatic. These lesions common occur by patients with positive ulnar variance.\n\nChronic and excessive loading through the ulnocarpal joint, causes degenerative TFCC tears. These tears are a component of ulnar impaction syndrome.\n\nEven though natural degeneration of the ulnocarpal joint is very common, it is important to recognize.\nIn cadavaric examinations, 30% to 70% of the cases had TFCC perforations and chondromalacia of the ulnar head, lunate and triquetrum. Cases with ulnar-negative variance had fewer degenerative changes.\n\nThe Palmer classification is the most recognized scheme; it divides TFCC lesions into these two categories. This classification provides an accurate anatomic description of tears, it does not guide treatment or indicate prognosis.\n\n\n\nPatients with a TFCC injury usually experience pain or discomfort located at the ulnar side of the wrist, often just above the ulnar styloid. However, there are also some patients who report diffuse pain throughout the entire wrist.\n\nRest can reduce pain and activity can make it worse, especially with rotating movements (supination and pronation) of the wrist or movements of the hand sideways in ulnar direction.\n\nOther symptoms patients with a TFCC injury frequently mention are: swelling, loss of grip strength, instability and grinding or clicking sounds (crepitus) that can occur during activity of the wrist.\n\nInjuries to the TFCC may be preceded by a fall on a pronated outstretched arm; a rotational injury to the forearm; an axial load trauma to the wrist; or a distraction injury of the wrist in ulnar direction. However, not all patients can recall a preceding trauma occurred.\n\nWendy Medeiros, OTR, CHT(ret) has designed a weight-bearing test to objectively analyze the stability of the wrist. This test has defined stability based on age, height and bone density. She has also developed a conservative management protocol for the treatment of TFCC tears after 12 years of research around the globe.\n\n\nNote: Imaging techniques can only be relevant together with the clinical findings of a carefully performed physical examination.\n\nOther than a TFCC injury, there are many possible causes for ulnar-sided wrist pain.\n\nThe initial treatment for both traumatic and degenerative TFCC lesions, with a stable DRUJ, is conservative (nonsurgical) therapy. Patients may be advised to wear a temporary splint or cast to immobilize the wrist and forearm for four to six weeks. The immobilization allows scar tissue to develop which can help heal the TFCC. In addition oral NSAID’s and corticosteroid joint injections can be prescribed for pain relief. Physiotherapy and Occupational Therapy can help patients recover after immobilization or surgery. Wrist support straps used in sports can also be used in mild cases to compress and minimize movement of the area.\n\nIndications for acute TFCC surgery are: a clearly unstable DRUJ, or the existence of additional unstable or displaced fractures. TFCC surgery is also indicated when conservative treatment proves insufficient in about 8–12 weeks.\n\nFractures of the radius bone are often associated by TFCC damage. If the fracture is treated surgically it is recommended to evaluate and if necessary repair the TFCC as well.\nClosed fractures (where the skin is still intact) of the radius bone are treated non-surgically with cast; the immobilization can also help heal the TFCC.\n\nThe central part of the TFC has no blood supply and therefore has no healing capacity. When a tear occurs in this area of the TFC, it typically creates an unstable flap of tissue that is likely to catch on other joint surfaces. Removing the damaged tissue (debridement) is then indicated.\nArthroscopic debridement as a treatment for degenerative TFC tears associated with positive ulnar variance, unfortunately, show poor results.\n\nSuturing TFCC ligaments can sometimes be performed arthroscopically. But only if there is no serious damage to the ligaments or other surrounding structures. Even after a short period of time torn ligaments tend to retract and therefore lose length. Retracted ligament ends are impossible to suture together again and a reconstruction may be necessary.\n\nOpen surgery is usually required for degenerative or more complex TFCC injuries, or if additional damage to the wrist or forearm caused instability or displacement. It is a more invasive surgical technique compared to arthroscopic treatment, but the surgeon has better visibility and access to the TFCC.\n\n\n", "id": "6985504", "title": "Triangular fibrocartilage"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7998715", "text": "Copula linguae\n\nThe copula linguae or copula, is a swelling that forms from the second pharyngeal arch, late in the fourth week of embryogenesis. During the fifth and sixth weeks the copula becomes overgrown and covered by the hypopharyngeal eminence which forms mostly from the third pharyngeal arch and in part from the fourth pharyngeal arch.\n", "id": "7998715", "title": "Copula linguae"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4890631", "text": "Transpyloric plane\n\nThe Transpyloric plane, also known as Addison's Plane, is an upper transverse line, located halfway between the jugular notch and the upper border of the pubic symphysis. It is also said to lie roughly a hand's breadth beneath the xiphoid process of the human sternum. The plane in most cases cuts through the pylorus of the stomach, the tips of the ninth costal cartilages and the lower border of the first lumbar vertebra.\n\nThe transpyloric plane is clinically notable because it passes through several important abdominal structures. These include:\n\n\n", "id": "4890631", "title": "Transpyloric plane"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32424744", "text": "Pelvic tilt\n\nPelvic tilt is the orientation of the pelvis in respect to the thighbones and the rest of the body. The pelvis can tilt towards the front, back, or either side of the body.\n\n\nCauses:\n1) Anterior pelvic tilt is caused by increased lumbar lordosis and thoracic kyphosis, stretched abdominal muscles, tightened hip flexors.\n2) Posterior pelvic tilt is caused by sway back and thoracic kyphosis, stretched flexors and lower abdominal muscles and tightened hamstrings.\n\n\n", "id": "32424744", "title": "Pelvic tilt"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2045932", "text": "Sulcus (morphology)\n\nThe term sulcus (pl. \"sulci\") is a general descriptive term for a furrow or fissure. It is used in many disciplines, such as geology, but in morphological and anatomical connections it usually refers to a groove as a feature in the surface of a limb or an organ, notably in the surface of the brain, but also in the lungs, certain muscles (including the heart), as well as in many bones, and various other major morphological features, both internal and external. Many sulci are the product of a surface fold or junction, such as in the gums, where they fold around the neck of the tooth.\n\nThe term \"sulcus\" is used in invertebrate zoology to describe folds, grooves, and boundaries, especially at the edges of sclerites or between segments.\n\nIn botany and palynology, the surface morphology of seeds and pollen grains is termed sulcate if one or more sulci form major features. In the case of pollen, these sulci, called colpi (sing: colpus), are the apertures through which the pollen tube germinates. Smaller furrows may be described by other terms such as rugose, rugulose, plicate, striate, etc.\n\n\n", "id": "2045932", "title": "Sulcus (morphology)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34427394", "text": "Lesser Triangle\n\nIt is a triangle contained within the Submandibular triangle. Its boundaries are the Hypoglossal Nerve, and the Anterior and Posterior belly of the Digastric muscle. This triangle was named after a German surgeon named Ladislaus Leon Lesser, who lived from 1846-1925\n", "id": "34427394", "title": "Lesser Triangle"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2125301", "text": "Cephalic vein\n\nIn human anatomy, the cephalic vein is a superficial vein in the arm.\n\nIt communicates with the basilic vein via the median cubital vein at the elbow and is located in the superficial fascia along the anterolateral surface of the biceps brachii muscle.\n\nNear the shoulder, the cephalic vein passes between the deltoid and pectoralis major muscles (deltopectoral groove) and through the deltopectoral triangle, where it empties into the axillary vein.\n\nThe cephalic vein is often visible through the skin, and its location in the deltopectoral groove is fairly consistent, making this site a good candidate for venous access. Permanent pacemaker leads are often placed in the cephalic vein in the deltopectoral groove. The vein may be used for intravenous access, as large bore cannula may be easily placed. However, the cannulation of a vein as close to the radial nerve as the cephalic vein can sometimes lead to nerve damage.\n\nOrdinarily the term \"cephalic\" refers to anatomy of the head. When Persian physician Ibn Sīnā's Canon was translated into medieval Latin, \"cephalic\" was mistakenly chosen to render the Arabic term \"al-kífal\", meaning \"outer\".\n\n\n", "id": "2125301", "title": "Cephalic vein"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2855272", "text": "Vascularity\n\nVascularity, in bodybuilding, is the condition of having many highly-visible, prominent, and often extensively-ramified superficial veins. The skin appears \"thin\" — sometimes virtually diaphanous — due to an extreme reduction of subcutaneous fat, allowing for maximum muscle definition. \n\nVascularity is enhanced by extremely low body fat (usually below 10%) and low retained water, as well as the muscle engorgement (\"pump\") and venous distension accentuated by the vigorous flexing and potentially hazardous Valsalva effect which characterize competitive posing. Genetics and androgenic hormones will affect vascularity, as will ambient temperature. (And although some bodybuilders develop arterial hypertension from performance-enhancing substances and practices, \"high\" venous pressure — being an order of magnitude lower than that of arteries — neither causes nor is caused by vascularity.) Some bodybuilders use topical vasodilators to increase blood flow to the skin as well. Although historically controversial, nowadays vascularity is a highly-sought-after aesthetic for many male bodybuilders, but less so for female bodybuilders where the target aesthetic is relatively more towards aesthetic symmetry than extreme development.\n\nBodybuilders or athletes sometimes dehydrate themselves a few days before a competition or show to achieve this so-called \"ripped,\" vascular look. Self-dehydration is not recommended by medical professionals, as the negative and sometimes-tragic effects of the resultant water-electrolyte imbalances are well documented.\n\n", "id": "2855272", "title": "Vascularity"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18121942", "text": "Regius Professor of Anatomy (Aberdeen)\n\nThe Regius Professor of Anatomy is a Regius Professorship at the University of Aberdeen in Scotland.\n\nSix people have been appointed to this position:\n", "id": "18121942", "title": "Regius Professor of Anatomy (Aberdeen)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4870390", "text": "Regius Professor of Anatomy (Glasgow)\n\nThe Regius Chair of Anatomy is a Regius professorship at the University of Glasgow in Scotland.\n\nFounded in 1718 as the Regius Chair of Anatomy and Botany the province of the chair was restricted to anatomy in 1818 when the Regius Chair of Botany was founded.\n\n\n\n", "id": "4870390", "title": "Regius Professor of Anatomy (Glasgow)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2297376", "text": "Basilic vein\n\nThe basilic vein is a large superficial vein of the upper limb that helps drain parts of the hand and forearm. It originates on the medial (ulnar) side of the dorsal venous network of the hand and travels up the base of the forearm, where its course is generally visible through the skin as it travels in the subcutaneous fat and fascia lying superficial to the muscles.\n\nNear the region anterior to the cubital fossa, in the bend of the elbow joint, the basilic vein usually connects with the other large superficial vein of the upper extremity, the cephalic vein, via the median cubital vein (or median basilic vein). The layout of superficial veins in the forearm is highly variable from person to person, and there is a profuse network of unnamed superficial veins that the basilic vein communicates with.\n\nAs it ascends the medial side of the biceps in the arm proper (between the elbow and shoulder), the basilic vein normally perforates the brachial fascia (deep fascia) above the medial epicondyle, or even as high as mid-arm. There, around the lower border of the teres major muscle, the anterior and posterior circumflex humeral veins feed into it, just before it joins the brachial veins to form the axillary vein.\n\nAlong with other superficial veins in the forearm, the basilic vein is an acceptable site for venipuncture. Nevertheless, IV nurses sometimes refer to the basilic vein as the \"virgin vein,\" since with the arm typically supinated during phlebotomy the basilic vein below the elbow becomes awkward to access, and is therefore infrequently used.\n\nVascular surgeons sometimes utilize the basilic vein to create an AV (arteriovenous) fistula or AV graft for hemodialysis access in patients with renal failure.\n\n\n", "id": "2297376", "title": "Basilic vein"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69447", "text": "Mucous membrane\n\nA mucous membrane or mucosa is a membrane that lines various cavities in the body and covers the surface of internal organs. It consists of one or more layers of epithelial cells overlying a layer of loose connective tissue. It is mostly of endodermal origin and is continuous with the skin at various body openings such as the eyes, ears, inside the nose, inside the mouth, lip, the urethral opening and the anus. Some mucous membranes secrete mucus, a thick protective fluid. The function of the membrane is to stop pathogens and dirt from entering the body and to prevent bodily tissues from becoming dehydrated.\n\nThe mucosa of organs are composed of one or more layers of epithelial cells that secrete mucus, and an underlying lamina propria of loose connective tissue. The type of cells and type of mucus secreted vary from organ to organ and each can differ along a given tract.\n\nMucous membranes line the digestive, respiratory, and reproductive tracts and are the primary barrier between the external world and the interior of the body; in an adult human the total surface area of the mucosa is about 400 square meters while the surface area of the skin is about 2 square meters. They are at several places contiguous with skin: at the nostrils, the lips of the mouth, the eyelids, the ears, the genital area, and the anus. Along with providing a physical barrier, they also contain key parts of the immune system and serve as the interface between the body proper and the microbiome.\n\nSome examples include:\n\nDevelopmentally, the majority of mucous membranes are of endodermal origin. Exceptions include the palate, cheeks, floor of the mouth, gums, lips and the portion of the anal canal below the pectinate line, which are all ectodermal in origin.\n\nOne of its functions is to keep the tissue moist (for example in the respiratory tract, including the mouth and nose). It also plays a role in absorbing and transforming nutrients. Mucous membranes also protect the body from itself; for instance mucosa in the stomach protects it from stomach acid, and mucosa lining the bladder protects the underlying tissue from urine. In the uterus, the mucous membrane is called the endometrium, and it swells each month and is then eliminated during menstruation.\n\nNiacin and vitamin A are essential nutrients that help maintain mucous membranes.\n\n", "id": "69447", "title": "Mucous membrane"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37837439", "text": "Reinke's space\n\nReinke's space is a potential space between the vocal ligament and the overlying mucosa. It is not an empty space, but contains cells, special fibers and extracellular matrix. It plays an important role in the vibration of the vocal cords. Edema of this space is called Reinke's edema.\n", "id": "37837439", "title": "Reinke's space"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38444761", "text": "Caruncle (bird anatomy)\n\nA caruncle is defined as 'a small, fleshy excrescence that is a normal part of an animal's anatomy'. Within this definition, caruncles in birds include wattles (or dewlaps), snoods, and earlobes. The term caruncle is derived from Latin 'caruncula', the diminutive of 'carō', flesh.\n\nCaruncles are carnosities, often of bright colors such as red, blue, yellow or white. They can be present on the head, neck, throat, cheeks or around the eyes of some birds. They may be present as combs or crests and other structures near the beak, or, hanging from the throat or neck. Caruncles may be featherless, or, have small scattered feathers. In some species, they may form pendulous structures of erectile tissue, such as the \"snood\" of the domestic turkey.\n\nCaruncles are sometimes secondary sexual characteristics, having a more intense color or even a different color, developing as the male reaches sexual maturity.\n\nCaruncles are also ornamental elements used by males to attract females to breeding. Having large caruncles or colorful bright ones indicates high levels of testosterone, that they are well-fed birds able to elude other predators thus showing the good quality of their genes. It has been proposed that these organs are also associated with genes which encode resistance to disease. It is believed that for birds living in tropical regions, the caruncles also play a role in thermoregulation, making the blood cool faster when flowing through them.\n\n In turkeys, the term usually refers to small, bulbous, fleshy protuberances found on the head, neck and throat, with larger structures particularly at the bottom of the throat. The wattle is a flap of skin hanging under the chin connecting the throat and head and the snood is a highly erectile appendage emanating from the forehead. Both sexes of turkey possess caruncles, although they are more pronounced in the male. Usually they are pale, but when the male becomes excited or during courtship, the caruncles, wattle and snood all engorge with blood, become bright red or blue, and enlarge.\n\nThe \"beard\" (a tuft of modified brush-like feathers) also becomes erect.\n\nIn the context of Muscovy ducks, caruncles refer to the red fleshy mask that surrounds the head of adult birds, particularly prominent in adult drakes (males).\n\nMany species from a variety of families have caruncles, including:\n", "id": "38444761", "title": "Caruncle (bird anatomy)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38810480", "text": "Vermiform\n\nVermiform describes something shaped like a worm. The expression is often employed in biology and anatomy to describe more or less tubular or cylindrical, usually soft body parts or animals. The word root is Latin, \"vermes\"-worms and \"formes\"-shaped. A well known example is the vermiform appendix, a small, blind section of the gut in humans and a number of other mammals.\n\nA number of soft-bodied animal phyla are typically described as vermiform. The more well known one are undoubtedly the annelids (earthworm and relatives) and the roundworms (a very common, mainly parasitic group), but a number of less well known phyla answer to the same description. Examples range from the minute parasitic mesozoans to the larger bodied free-living phyla like ribbon worms, peanut worms and priapulids.\n", "id": "38810480", "title": "Vermiform"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39561954", "text": "Transcendental anatomy\n\nTranscendental anatomy, also known as philosophical anatomy, was a form of comparative anatomy that sought to find ideal patterns and structures common to all organisms in nature. The term originated from naturalist philosophy in the German provinces, and culminated in Britain especially by scholars such as Robert Knox and Richard Owen, who drew from Goethe and Lorenz Oken. From the 1820s to 1859, it persisted as the medical expression of natural philosophy before the .\n\nAmongst its various definitions, transcendental anatomy has four main tenets:\n\nJohann Wolfgang Goethe was one of many naturalists and anatomists in the ninetieth century who was in search of an Ideal Plan in nature. In Germany, this was known as \"Urpflanze\" for the plant kingdom and \"Urtier\" for animals. He popularized the term \"morphology\" for this search. Transcendental anatomy first derived from the naturalist philosophy known as \"Naturphilosophie\".\n\nIn the 1820s, French anatomist Etienne Reynaud Augustin Serres (1786-1868) popularized the term \"transcendental anatomy\" to refer to the collective morphological of animal development. Synonymous expressions such as philosophical anatomy, higher anatomy, and transcendental morphology also arose at this time.\n\nSome advocates regarded transcendental anatomy as the ultimate explanation for biological structures, while others saw it as one of several necessary explanatory devices.\n\nTranscendental anatomists theorized that the bones of the skull were \"cranial vertebra\", or modified bones from the vertebrae. Owen ardently supported the theory as major evidence for his theory of homology.\n\nThe theory has since been discredited.\n", "id": "39561954", "title": "Transcendental anatomy"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2302264", "text": "Gross anatomy\n\nGross anatomy (also called topographical anatomy) is the study of anatomy at the visible (macroscopic) level.\n\nGross anatomy is studied using both invasive and noninvasive methods with the goal of obtaining information about the macroscopic structure and organization of organs and organ systems. Among the most common methods of study is dissection, in which the corpse of an animal or a human cadaver is surgically opened and its organs studied. Endoscopy, in which a video camera-equipped instrument is inserted through a small incision in the subject, may be used to explore the internal organs and other structures of living animals. The anatomy of the circulatory system in a living animal may be studied noninvasively via angiography, a technique in which blood vessels are visualized after being injected with an opaque dye. Other means of study include radiological techniques of imaging, such as X-ray and MRI.\n\nMost doctoral health profession schools, such as medical and dental schools, require that students complete a practical (dissection) course in gross human anatomy. Such courses aim to educate students in basic human anatomy and seek to establish anatomical landmarks that may later be used to aid medical diagnosis. Many schools provide students with cadavers for investigation by dissection, aided by dissection manuals, as well as cadaveric atlases (e.g. Netter's, Rohen's). Medical schools have implemented on-screen anatomical lessons and tutorials to teach students surgical procedures. The use of technological visual aids and gross dissection are more effective together than either approach alone. Recently, online flashcards and quizzes have been used as well. Working intimately with a cadaver during a gross anatomy course captures the essence of the patient-provider relationship. \n\n\n\n", "id": "2302264", "title": "Gross anatomy"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=674", "text": "Anatomy\n\nAnatomy (Greek anatomē, “dissection”) is the branch of biology concerned with the study of the structure of organisms and their parts. Anatomy is a branch of natural science dealing with the structural organization of living things. It is an old science, having its beginnings in prehistoric times. Anatomy is inherently tied to embryology, comparative anatomy, evolutionary biology, and phylogeny, as these are the processes by which anatomy is generated over immediate (embryology) and long (evolution) timescales. Human anatomy is one of the basic essential sciences of medicine. Anatomy and physiology, which study (respectively) the structure and function of organisms and their parts, make a natural pair of related disciplines, and they are often studied together.\n\nThe discipline of anatomy is divided into macroscopic and microscopic anatomy. Macroscopic anatomy, or gross anatomy, is the examination of an animal's body parts using unaided eyesight. Gross anatomy also includes the branch of superficial anatomy. Microscopic anatomy involves the use of optical instruments in the study of the tissues of various structures, known as histology, and also in the study of cells.\n\nThe history of anatomy is characterized by a progressive understanding of the functions of the organs and structures of the human body. Methods have also improved dramatically, advancing from the examination of animals by dissection of carcasses and cadavers (corpses) to 20th century medical imaging techniques including X-ray, ultrasound, and magnetic resonance imaging.\n\nDerived from the Greek \"anatomē\" \"dissection\" (from \"anatémnō\" \"I cut up, cut open\" from ἀνά \"aná\" \"up\", and τέμνω \"témnō\" \"I cut\"), anatomy is the scientific study of the structure of organisms including their systems, organs and tissues. It includes the appearance and position of the various parts, the materials from which they are composed, their locations and their relationships with other parts. Anatomy is quite distinct from physiology and biochemistry, which deal respectively with the functions of those parts and the chemical processes involved. For example, an anatomist is concerned with the shape, size, position, structure, blood supply and innervation of an organ such as the liver; while a physiologist is interested in the production of bile, the role of the liver in nutrition and the regulation of bodily functions.\n\nThe discipline of anatomy can be subdivided into a number of branches including gross or macroscopic anatomy and microscopic anatomy. Gross anatomy is the study of structures large enough to be seen with the naked eye, and also includes superficial anatomy or surface anatomy, the study by sight of the external body features. Microscopic anatomy is the study of structures on a microscopic scale, including histology (the study of tissues), and embryology (the study of an organism in its immature condition).\n\nAnatomy can be studied using both invasive and non-invasive methods with the goal of obtaining information about the structure and organization of organs and systems. Methods used include dissection, in which a body is opened and its organs studied, and endoscopy, in which a video camera-equipped instrument is inserted through a small incision in the body wall and used to explore the internal organs and other structures. Angiography using X-rays or magnetic resonance angiography are methods to visualize blood vessels.\n\nThe term \"anatomy\" is commonly taken to refer to human anatomy. However, substantially the same structures and tissues are found throughout the rest of the animal kingdom and the term also includes the anatomy of other animals. The term \"zootomy\" is also sometimes used to specifically refer to animals. The structure and tissues of plants are of a dissimilar nature and they are studied in plant anatomy.\n\nThe kingdom Animalia or metazoa, contains multicellular organisms that are heterotrophic and motile (although some have secondarily adopted a sessile lifestyle). Most animals have bodies differentiated into separate tissues and these animals are also known as eumetazoans. They have an internal digestive chamber, with one or two openings; the gametes are produced in multicellular sex organs, and the zygotes include a blastula stage in their embryonic development. Metazoans do not include the sponges, which have undifferentiated cells.\n\nUnlike plant cells, animal cells have neither a cell wall nor chloroplasts. Vacuoles, when present, are more in number and much smaller than those in the plant cell. The body tissues are composed of numerous types of cell, including those found in muscles, nerves and skin. Each typically has a cell membrane formed of phospholipids, cytoplasm and a nucleus. All of the different cells of an animal are derived from the embryonic germ layers. Those simpler invertebrates which are formed from two germ layers of ectoderm and endoderm are called diploblastic and the more developed animals whose structures and organs are formed from three germ layers are called triploblastic. All of a triploblastic animal's tissues and organs are derived from the three germ layers of the embryo, the ectoderm, mesoderm and endoderm.\n\nAnimal tissues can be grouped into four basic types: connective, epithelial, muscle and nervous tissue.\nConnective tissues are fibrous and made up of cells scattered among inorganic material called the extracellular matrix. Connective tissue gives shape to organs and holds them in place. The main types are loose connective tissue, adipose tissue, fibrous connective tissue, cartilage and bone. The extracellular matrix contains proteins, the chief and most abundant of which is collagen. Collagen plays a major part in organizing and maintaining tissues. The matrix can be modified to form a skeleton to support or protect the body. An exoskeleton is a thickened, rigid cuticle which is stiffened by mineralization, as in crustaceans or by the cross-linking of its proteins as in insects. An endoskeleton is internal and present in all developed animals, as well as in many of those less developed.\n\nEpithelial tissue is composed of closely packed cells, bound to each other by cell adhesion molecules, with little intercellular space. Epithelial cells can be squamous (flat), cuboidal or columnar and rest on a basal lamina, the upper layer of the basement membrane, the lower layer is the reticular lamina lying next to the connective tissue in the extracellular matrix secreted by the epithelial cells. There are many different types of epithelium, modified to suit a particular function. In the respiratory tract there is a type of ciliated epithelial lining; in the small intestine there are microvilli on the epithelial lining and in the large intestine there are intestinal villi. Skin consists of an outer layer of keratinized stratified squamous epithelium that covers the exterior of the vertebrate body. Keratinocytes make up to 95% of the cells in the skin. The epithelial cells on the external surface of the body typically secrete an extracellular matrix in the form of a cuticle. In simple animals this may just be a coat of glycoproteins. In more advanced animals, many glands are formed of epithelial cells.\n\nMuscle cells (myocytes) form the active contractile tissue of the body. Muscle tissue functions to produce force and cause motion, either locomotion or movement within internal organs. Muscle is formed of contractile filaments and is separated into three main types; smooth muscle, skeletal muscle and cardiac muscle. Smooth muscle has no striations when examined microscopically. It contracts slowly but maintains contractibility over a wide range of stretch lengths. It is found in such organs as sea anemone tentacles and the body wall of sea cucumbers. Skeletal muscle contracts rapidly but has a limited range of extension. It is found in the movement of appendages and jaws. Obliquely striated muscle is intermediate between the other two. The filaments are staggered and this is the type of muscle found in earthworms that can extend slowly or make rapid contractions. In higher animals striated muscles occur in bundles attached to bone to provide movement and are often arranged in antagonistic sets. Smooth muscle is found in the walls of the uterus, bladder, intestines, stomach, oesophagus, respiratory airways, and blood vessels. Cardiac muscle is found only in the heart, allowing it to contract and pump blood round the body.\n\nNervous tissue is composed of many nerve cells known as neurons which transmit information. In some slow-moving radially symmetrical marine animals such as ctenophores and cnidarians (including sea anemones and jellyfish), the nerves form a nerve net, but in most animals they are organized longitudinally into bundles. In simple animals, receptor neurons in the body wall cause a local reaction to a stimulus. In more complex animals, specialized receptor cells such as chemoreceptors and photoreceptors are found in groups and send messages along neural networks to other parts of the organism. Neurons can be connected together in ganglia. In higher animals, specialized receptors are the basis of sense organs and there is a central nervous system (brain and spinal cord) and a peripheral nervous system. The latter consists of sensory nerves that transmit information from sense organs and motor nerves that influence target organs. The peripheral nervous system is divided into the somatic nervous system which conveys sensation and controls voluntary muscle, and the autonomic nervous system which involuntarily controls smooth muscle, certain glands and internal organs, including the stomach.\n\nAll vertebrates have a similar basic body plan and at some point in their lives, mostly in the embryonic stage, share the major chordate characteristics; a stiffening rod, the notochord; a dorsal hollow tube of nervous material, the neural tube; pharyngeal arches; and a tail posterior to the anus. The spinal cord is protected by the vertebral column and is above the notochord and the gastrointestinal tract is below it. Nervous tissue is derived from the ectoderm, connective tissues are derived from mesoderm, and gut is derived from the endoderm. At the posterior end is a tail which continues the spinal cord and vertebrae but not the gut. The mouth is found at the anterior end of the animal, and the anus at the base of the tail. The defining characteristic of a vertebrate is the vertebral column, formed in the development of the segmented series of vertebrae. In most vertebrates the notochord becomes the nucleus pulposus of the intervertebral discs. However, a few vertebrates, such as the sturgeon and the coelacanth retain the notochord into adulthood. Jawed vertebrates are typified by paired appendages, fins or legs, which may be secondarily lost. The limbs of vertebrates are considered to be homologous because the same underlying skeletal structure was inherited from their last common ancestor. This is one of the arguments put forward by Charles Darwin to support his theory of evolution.\n\nThe body of a fish is divided into a head, trunk and tail, although the divisions between the three are not always externally visible. The skeleton, which forms the support structure inside the fish, is either made of cartilage, in cartilaginous fish, or bone in bony fish. The main skeletal element is the vertebral column, composed of articulating vertebrae which are lightweight yet strong. The ribs attach to the spine and there are no limbs or limb girdles. The main external features of the fish, the fins, are composed of either bony or soft spines called rays, which with the exception of the caudal fins, have no direct connection with the spine. They are supported by the muscles which compose the main part of the trunk. The heart has two chambers and pumps the blood through the respiratory surfaces of the gills and on round the body in a single circulatory loop. The eyes are adapted for seeing underwater and have only local vision. There is an inner ear but no external or middle ear. Low frequency vibrations are detected by the lateral line system of sense organs that run along the length of the sides of fish, and these respond to nearby movements and to changes in water pressure.\n\nSharks and rays are basal fish with numerous primitive anatomical features similar to those of ancient fish, including skeletons composed of cartilage. Their bodies tend to be dorso-ventrally flattened, they usually have five pairs of gill slits and a large mouth set on the underside of the head. The dermis is covered with separate dermal placoid scales. They have a cloaca into which the urinary and genital passages open, but not a swim bladder. Cartilaginous fish produce a small number of large, yolky eggs. Some species are ovoviviparous and the young develop internally but others are oviparous and the larvae develop externally in egg cases.\n\nThe bony fish lineage shows more derived anatomical traits, often with major evolutionary changes from the features of ancient fish. They have a bony skeleton, are generally laterally flattened, have five pairs of gills protected by an operculum, and a mouth at or near the tip of the snout. The dermis is covered with overlapping scales. Bony fish have a swim bladder which helps them maintain a constant depth in the water column, but not a cloaca. They mostly spawn a large number of small eggs with little yolk which they broadcast into the water column.\n\nAmphibians are a class of animals comprising frogs, salamanders and caecilians. They are tetrapods, but the caecilians and a few species of salamander have either no limbs or their limbs are much reduced in size. Their main bones are hollow and lightweight and are fully ossified and the vertebrae interlock with each other and have articular processes. Their ribs are usually short and may be fused to the vertebrae. Their skulls are mostly broad and short, and are often incompletely ossified. Their skin contains little keratin and lacks scales, but contains many mucous glands and in some species, poison glands. The hearts of amphibians have three chambers, two atria and one ventricle. They have a urinary bladder and nitrogenous waste products are excreted primarily as urea. Amphibians breathe by means of buccal pumping, a pump action in which air is first drawn into the buccopharyngeal region through the nostrils. These are then closed and the air is forced into the lungs by contraction of the throat. They supplement this with gas exchange through the skin which needs to be kept moist.\n\nIn frogs the pelvic girdle is robust and the hind legs are much longer and stronger than the forelimbs. The feet have four or five digits and the toes are often webbed for swimming or have suction pads for climbing. Frogs have large eyes and no tail. Salamanders resemble lizards in appearance; their short legs project sideways, the belly is close to or in contact with the ground and they have a long tail. Caecilians superficially resemble earthworms and are limbless. They burrow by means of zones of muscle contractions which move along the body and they swim by undulating their body from side to side.\n\nReptiles are a class of animals comprising turtles, tuataras, lizards, snakes and crocodiles. They are tetrapods, but the snakes and a few species of lizard either have no limbs or their limbs are much reduced in size. Their bones are better ossified and their skeletons stronger than those of amphibians. The teeth are conical and mostly uniform in size. The surface cells of the epidermis are modified into horny scales which create a waterproof layer. Reptiles are unable to use their skin for respiration as do amphibians and have a more efficient respiratory system drawing air into their lungs by expanding their chest walls. The heart resembles that of the amphibian but there is a septum which more completely separates the oxygenated and deoxygenated bloodstreams. The reproductive system has evolved for internal fertilization, with a copulatory organ present in most species. The eggs are surrounded by amniotic membranes which prevents them from drying out and are laid on land, or develop internally in some species. The bladder is small as nitrogenous waste is excreted as uric acid.\n\nTurtles are notable for their protective shells. They have an inflexible trunk encased in a horny carapace above and a plastron below. These are formed from bony plates embedded in the dermis which are overlain by horny ones and are partially fused with the ribs and spine. The neck is long and flexible and the head and the legs can be drawn back inside the shell. Turtles are vegetarians and the typical reptile teeth have been replaced by sharp, horny plates. In aquatic species, the front legs are modified into flippers.\n\nTuataras superficially resemble lizards but the lineages diverged in the Triassic period. There is one living species, \"Sphenodon punctatus\". The skull has two openings (fenestrae) on either side and the jaw is rigidly attached to the skull. There is one row of teeth in the lower jaw and this fits between the two rows in the upper jaw when the animal chews. The teeth are merely projections of bony material from the jaw and eventually wear down. The brain and heart are more primitive than those of other reptiles, and the lungs have a single chamber and lack bronchi. The tuatara has a well-developed parietal eye on its forehead.\n\nLizards have skulls with only one fenestra on each side, the lower bar of bone below the second fenestra having been lost. This results in the jaws being less rigidly attached which allows the mouth to open wider. Lizards are mostly quadrupeds, with the trunk held off the ground by short, sideways-facing legs, but a few species have no limbs and resemble snakes. Lizards have moveable eyelids, eardrums are present and some species have a central parietal eye.\n\nSnakes are closely related to lizards, having branched off from a common ancestral lineage during the Cretaceous period, and they share many of the same features. The skeleton consists of a skull, a hyoid bone, spine and ribs though a few species retain a vestige of the pelvis and rear limbs in the form of pelvic spurs. The bar under the second fenestra has also been lost and the jaws have extreme flexibility allowing the snake to swallow its prey whole. Snakes lack moveable eyelids, the eyes being covered by transparent \"spectacle\" scales. They do not have eardrums but can detect ground vibrations through the bones of their skull. Their forked tongues are used as organs of taste and smell and some species have sensory pits on their heads enabling them to locate warm-blooded prey.\n\nCrocodilians are large, low-slung aquatic reptiles with long snouts and large numbers of teeth. The head and trunk are dorso-ventrally flattened and the tail is laterally compressed. It undulates from side to side to force the animal through the water when swimming. The tough keratinized scales provide body armour and some are fused to the skull. The nostrils, eyes and ears are elevated above the top of the flat head enabling them to remain above the surface of the water when the animal is floating. Valves seal the nostrils and ears when it is submerged. Unlike other reptiles, crocodilians have hearts with four chambers allowing complete separation of oxygenated and deoxygenated blood.\n\nBirds are tetrapods but though their hind limbs are used for walking or hopping, their front limbs are wings covered with feathers and adapted for flight. Birds are endothermic, have a high metabolic rate, a light skeletal system and powerful muscles. The long bones are thin, hollow and very light. Air sac extensions from the lungs occupy the centre of some bones. The sternum is wide and usually has a keel and the caudal vertebrae are fused. There are no teeth and the narrow jaws are adapted into a horn-covered beak. The eyes are relatively large, particularly in nocturnal species such as owls. They face forwards in predators and sideways in ducks.\n\nThe feathers are outgrowths of the epidermis and are found in localized bands from where they fan out over the skin. Large flight feathers are found on the wings and tail, contour feathers cover the bird's surface and fine down occurs on young birds and under the contour feathers of water birds. The only cutaneous gland is the single uropygial gland near the base of the tail. This produces an oily secretion that waterproofs the feathers when the bird preens. There are scales on the legs, feet and claws on the tips of the toes.\n\nMammals are a diverse class of animals, mostly terrestrial but some are aquatic and others have evolved flapping or gliding flight. They mostly have four limbs but some aquatic mammals have no limbs or limbs modified into fins and the forelimbs of bats are modified into wings. The legs of most mammals are situated below the trunk, which is held well clear of the ground. The bones of mammals are well ossified and their teeth, which are usually differentiated, are coated in a layer of prismatic enamel. The teeth are shed once (milk teeth) during the animal's lifetime or not at all, as is the case in cetaceans. Mammals have three bones in the middle ear and a cochlea in the inner ear. They are clothed in hair and their skin contains glands which secrete sweat. Some of these glands are specialized as mammary glands, producing milk to feed the young. Mammals breathe with lungs and have a muscular diaphragm separating the thorax from the abdomen which helps them draw air into the lungs. The mammalian heart has four chambers and oxygenated and deoxygenated blood are kept entirely separate. Nitrogenous waste is excreted primarily as urea.\n\nMammals are amniotes, and most are viviparous, giving birth to live young. The exception to this are the egg-laying monotremes, the platypus and the echidnas of Australia. Most other mammals have a placenta through which the developing foetus obtains nourishment, but in marsupials, the foetal stage is very short and the immature young is born and finds its way to its mother's pouch where it latches on to a nipple and completes its development.\n\nHumans have the overall body plan of a mammal. Humans have a head, neck, trunk (which includes the thorax and abdomen), two arms and hands, and two legs and feet.\n\nGenerally, students of certain biological sciences, paramedics, prosthetists and orthotists, physiotherapists, occupational therapists, nurses, podiatrists, and medical students learn gross anatomy and microscopic anatomy from anatomical models, skeletons, textbooks, diagrams, photographs, lectures and tutorials, and in addition, medical students generally also learn gross anatomy through practical experience of dissection and inspection of cadavers. The study of microscopic anatomy (or histology) can be aided by practical experience examining histological preparations (or slides) under a microscope.\nHuman anatomy, physiology and biochemistry are complementary basic medical sciences, which are generally taught to medical students in their first year at medical school. Human anatomy can be taught regionally or systemically; that is, respectively, studying anatomy by bodily regions such as the head and chest, or studying by specific systems, such as the nervous or respiratory systems. The major anatomy textbook, Gray's Anatomy, has been reorganized from a systems format to a regional format, in line with modern teaching methods. A thorough working knowledge of anatomy is required by physicians, especially surgeons and doctors working in some diagnostic specialties, such as histopathology and radiology.\nAcademic anatomists are usually employed by universities, medical schools or teaching hospitals. They are often involved in teaching anatomy, and research into certain systems, organs, tissues or cells.\n\nInvertebrates constitute a vast array of living organisms ranging from the simplest unicellular eukaryotes such as \"Paramecium\" to such complex multicellular animals as the octopus, lobster and dragonfly. They constitute about 95% of the animal species. By definition, none of these creatures has a backbone. The cells of single-cell protozoans have the same basic structure as those of multicellular animals but some parts are specialized into the equivalent of tissues and organs. Locomotion is often provided by cilia or flagella or may proceed via the advance of pseudopodia, food may be gathered by phagocytosis, energy needs may be supplied by photosynthesis and the cell may be supported by an endoskeleton or an exoskeleton. Some protozoans can form multicellular colonies.\n\nMetazoans are multicellular organism, different groups of cells of which have separate functions. The most basic types of metazoan tissues are epithelium and connective tissue, both of which are present in nearly all invertebrates. The outer surface of the epidermis is normally formed of epithelial cells and secretes an extracellular matrix which provides support to the organism. An endoskeleton derived from the mesoderm is present in echinoderms, sponges and some cephalopods. Exoskeletons are derived from the epidermis and is composed of chitin in arthropods (insects, spiders, ticks, shrimps, crabs, lobsters). Calcium carbonate constitutes the shells of molluscs, brachiopods and some tube-building polychaete worms and silica forms the exoskeleton of the microscopic diatoms and radiolaria. Other invertebrates may have no rigid structures but the epidermis may secrete a variety of surface coatings such as the pinacoderm of sponges, the gelatinous cuticle of cnidarians (polyps, sea anemones, jellyfish) and the collagenous cuticle of annelids. The outer epithelial layer may include cells of several types including sensory cells, gland cells and stinging cells. There may also be protrusions such as microvilli, cilia, bristles, spines and tubercles.\n\nMarcello Malpighi, the father of microscopical anatomy, discovered that plants had tubules similar to those he saw in insects like the silk worm. He observed that when a ring-like portion of bark was removed on a trunk a swelling occurred in the tissues above the ring, and he unmistakably interpreted this as growth stimulated by food coming down from the leaves, and being captured above the ring.\n\nArthropods comprise the largest phylum in the animal kingdom with over a million known invertebrate species.\n\nInsects possess segmented bodies supported by a hard-jointed outer covering, the exoskeleton, made mostly of chitin. The segments of the body are organized into three distinct parts, a head, a thorax and an abdomen. The head typically bears a pair of sensory antennae, a pair of compound eyes, one to three simple eyes (ocelli) and three sets of modified appendages that form the mouthparts. The thorax has three pairs of segmented legs, one pair each for the three segments that compose the thorax and one or two pairs of wings. The abdomen is composed of eleven segments, some of which may be fused and houses the digestive, respiratory, excretory and reproductive systems. There is considerable variation between species and many adaptations to the body parts, especially wings, legs, antennae and mouthparts.\n\nSpiders a class of arachnids have four pairs of legs; a body of two segments—a cephalothorax and an abdomen. Spiders have no wings and no antennae. They have mouthparts called chelicerae which are often connected to venom glands as most spiders are venomous. They have a second pair of appendages called pedipalps attached to the cephalothorax. These have similar segmentation to the legs and function as taste and smell organs. At the end of each male pedipalp is a spoon-shaped cymbium that acts to support the copulatory organ.\n\n\nIn 1600 BCE, the Edwin Smith Papyrus, an Ancient Egyptian medical text, described the heart, its vessels, liver, spleen, kidneys, hypothalamus, uterus and bladder, and showed the blood vessels diverging from the heart. The Ebers Papyrus (c. 1550 BCE) features a \"treatise on the heart\", with vessels carrying all the body's fluids to or from every member of the body.\n\nAncient Greek anatomy and physiology underwent great changes and advances throughout the early medieval world. Over time, this medical practice expanded by a continually developing understanding of the functions of organs and structures in the body. Phenomenal anatomical observations of the human body were made, which have contributed towards the understanding of the brain, eye, liver, reproductive organs and the nervous system.\n\nThe Hellenistic Egyptian city of Alexandria was the stepping-stone for Greek anatomy and physiology. Alexandria not only housed the biggest library for medical records and books of the liberal arts in the world during the time of the Greeks, but was also home to many medical practitioners and philosophers. Great patronage of the arts and sciences from the Ptolemy rulers helped raise Alexandria up, further rivalling the cultural and scientific achievements of other Greek states.\n\nSome of the most striking advances in early anatomy and physiology took place in Hellenistic Alexandria. Two of the most famous anatomists and physiologists of the third century were Herophilus and Erasistratus. These two physicians helped pioneer human dissection for medical research. They also conducted vivisections on the cadavers of condemned criminals, which was considered taboo until the Renaissance – Herophilus was recognized as the first person to perform systematic dissections. Herophilus became known for his anatomical works making impressing contributions to many branches of anatomy and many other aspects of medicine. Some of the works included classifying the system of the pulse, the discovery that human arteries had thicker walls then veins, and that the atria were parts of the heart. Herophilus’s knowledge of the human body has provided vital input towards understanding the brain, eye, liver, reproductive organs and nervous system, and characterizing the course of disease. Erasistratus accurately described the structure of the brain, including the cavities and membranes, and made a distinction between its cerebrum and cerebellum During his study in Alexandria, Erasistratus was particularly concerned with studies of the circulatory and nervous systems. He was able to distinguish the sensory and the motor nerves in the human body and believed that air entered the lungs and heart, which was then carried throughout the body. His distinction between the arteries and veins – the arteries carrying the air through the body, while the veins carried the blood from the heart was a great anatomical discovery. Erasistratus was also responsible for naming and describing the function of the epiglottis and the valves of the heart, including the tricuspid. During the third century, Greek physicians were able to differentiate nerves from blood vessels and tendons and to realize that the nerves convey neural impulses. It was Herophilus who made the point that damage to motor nerves induced paralysis. Herophilus named the meninges and ventricles in the brain, appreciated the division between cerebellum and cerebrum and recognized that the brain was the \"seat of intellect\" and not a \"cooling chamber\" as propounded by Aristotle Herophilus is also credited with describing the optic, oculomotor, motor division of the trigeminal, facial, vestibulocochlear and hypoglossal nerves.\n\nGreat feats were made during the third century in both the digestive and reproductive systems. Herophilus was able to discover and describe not only the salivary glands, but the small intestine and liver. He showed that the uterus is a hollow organ and described the ovaries and uterine tubes. He recognized that spermatozoa were produced by the testes and was the first to identify the prostate gland.\n\nThe anatomy of the muscles and skeleton is described in the \"Hippocratic Corpus\", an Ancient Greek medical work written by unknown authors. Aristotle described vertebrate anatomy based on animal dissection. Praxagoras identified the difference between arteries and veins. Also in the 4th century BCE, Herophilos and Erasistratus produced more accurate anatomical descriptions based on vivisection of criminals in Alexandria during the Ptolemaic dynasty.\n\nIn the 2nd century, Galen of Pergamum, an anatomist, clinician, writer and philosopher, wrote the final and highly influential anatomy treatise of ancient times. He compiled existing knowledge and studied anatomy through dissection of animals. He was one of the first experimental physiologists through his vivisection experiments on animals. Galen's drawings, based mostly on dog anatomy, became effectively the only anatomical textbook for the next thousand years. His work was known to Renaissance doctors only through Islamic Golden Age medicine until it was translated from the Greek some time in the 15th century.\n\nAnatomy developed little from classical times until the sixteenth century; as the historian Marie Boas writes, \"Progress in anatomy before the sixteenth century is as mysteriously slow as its development after 1500 is startlingly rapid\". Between 1275 and 1326, the anatomists Mondino de Luzzi, Alessandro Achillini and Antonio Benivieni at Bologna carried out the first systematic human dissections since ancient times. Mondino's \"Anatomy\" of 1316 was the first textbook in the medieval rediscovery of human anatomy. It describes the body in the order followed in Mondino's dissections, starting with the abdomen, then the thorax, then the head and limbs. It was the standard anatomy textbook for the next century.\n\nLeonardo da Vinci (1452–1519) was trained in anatomy by Andrea del Verrocchio. He made use of his anatomical knowledge in his artwork, making many sketches of skeletal structures, muscles and organs of humans and other vertebrates that he dissected.\n\nAndreas Vesalius (1514–1564) (Latinized from Andries van Wezel), professor of anatomy at the University of Padua, is considered the founder of modern human anatomy. Originally from Brabant, Vesalius published the influential book \"De humani corporis fabrica\" (\"the structure of the human body\"), a large format book in seven volumes, in 1543. The accurate and intricately detailed illustrations, often in allegorical poses against Italianate landscapes, are thought to have been made by the artist Jan van Calcar, a pupil of Titian.\n\nIn England, anatomy was the subject of the first public lectures given in any science; these were given by the Company of Barbers and Surgeons in the 16th century, joined in 1583 by the Lumleian lectures in surgery at the Royal College of Physicians.\n\nIn the United States, medical schools began to be set up towards the end of the 18th century. Classes in anatomy needed a continual stream of cadavers for dissection and these were difficult to obtain. Philadelphia, Baltimore and New York were all renowned for body snatching activity as criminals raided graveyards at night, removing newly buried corpses from their coffins. A similar problem existed in Britain where demand for bodies became so great that grave-raiding and even anatomy murder were practised to obtain cadavers. Some graveyards were in consequence protected with watchtowers. The practice was halted in Britain by the Anatomy Act of 1832, while in the United States, similar legislation was enacted after the physician William S. Forbes of Jefferson Medical College was found guilty in 1882 of \"complicity with resurrectionists in the despoliation of graves in Lebanon Cemetery\".\n\nThe teaching of anatomy in Britain was transformed by Sir John Struthers, Regius Professor of Anatomy at the University of Aberdeen from 1863 to 1889. He was responsible for setting up the system of three years of \"pre-clinical\" academic teaching in the sciences underlying medicine, including especially anatomy. This system lasted until the reform of medical training in 1993 and 2003. As well as teaching, he collected many vertebrate skeletons for his museum of comparative anatomy, published over 70 research papers, and became famous for his public dissection of the Tay Whale. From 1822 the Royal College of Surgeons regulated the teaching of anatomy in medical schools. Medical museums provided examples in comparative anatomy, and were often used in teaching. Ignaz Semmelweis investigated puerperal fever and he discovered how it was caused. He noticed that the frequently fatal fever occurred more often in mothers examined by medical students than by midwives. The students went from the dissecting room to the hospital ward and examined women in childbirth. Semmelweis showed that when the trainees washed their hands in chlorinated lime before each clinical examination, the incidence of puerperal fever among the mothers could be reduced dramatically.\n\nBefore the modern medical era, the main means for studying the internal structures of the body were dissection of the dead and inspection, palpation and auscultation of the living. It was the advent of microscopy that opened up an understanding of the building blocks that constituted living tissues. Technical advances in the development of achromatic lenses increased the resolving power of the microscope and around 1839, Matthias Jakob Schleiden and Theodor Schwann identified that cells were the fundamental unit of organization of all living things. Study of small structures involved passing light through them and the microtome was invented to provide sufficiently thin slices of tissue to examine. Staining techniques using artificial dyes were established to help distinguish between different types of tissue. Advances in the fields of histology and cytology began in the late 19th century along with advances in surgical techniques allowing for the painless and safe removal of biopsy specimens. The invention of the electron microscope brought a great advance in resolution power and allowed research into the ultrastructure of cells and the organelles and other structures within them. About the same time, in the 1950s, the use of X-ray diffraction for studying the crystal structures of proteins, nucleic acids and other biological molecules gave rise to a new field of molecular anatomy.\n\nEqually important advances have occurred in \"non-invasive\" techniques for examining the interior structures of the body. X-rays can be passed through the body and used in medical radiography and fluoroscopy to differentiate interior structures that have varying degrees of opaqueness. Magnetic resonance imaging, computed tomography, and ultrasound imaging have all enabled examination of internal structures, living or dead, in unprecedented detail to a degree far beyond the imagination of earlier generations.\n\n\n\n", "id": "674", "title": "Anatomy"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4334788", "text": "Aplasia\n\nAplasia (from Greek \"a\" (not, no); \"plasis\" (molding)) is defined in general as \"defective development or congenital absence of an organ or tissue.\" In the field of hematology, the term refers to \"incomplete, retarded, or defective development, or cessation of the usual regenerative process.\"\n\n\n", "id": "4334788", "title": "Aplasia"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2122745", "text": "Atresia\n\nAtresia is a condition in which an orifice or passage in the body is (usually abnormally) closed or absent.\n\nExamples of atresia include:\n", "id": "2122745", "title": "Atresia"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18575266", "text": "Terminal cisternae\n\nTerminal cisternae are enlarged areas of the sarcoplasmic reticulum surrounding the transverse tubules. These discrete regions within the muscle cell store calcium (increasing the capacity of the sarcoplasmic reticulum to release calcium) and release it when an action potential courses down the transverse tubules, eliciting muscle contraction. Because terminal cisternae ensure rapid calcium delivery, they are well developed in muscles that contract quickly, such as fast twitch skeletal muscle. Terminal cisternae then go on to release calcium, which binds to troponin. This releases tropomyosin, exposing active sites of the thin filament, actin.\n\nThere are several mechanisms directly linked to the terminal cisternae which facilitate Excitation-Contraction coupling, which include ryanodine (RYR) receptors, and a voltage gated calcium channel which help transfer the action potential into a calcium efflux of the Sarcoplasmic Reticulum. \n\nA T-tubule surrounded by two terminal cisternae is referred to as a \"muscle triad\" in physiology. As previously explained, the terminal cisternae along with the transverse tubules are the mechanisms of transduction from a nervous impulse to an actual muscle contraction.\n", "id": "18575266", "title": "Terminal cisternae"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=232388", "text": "Motor system\n\nThe motor system is the part of the central nervous system that is involved with movement. It consists of the pyramidal and extrapyramidal system. \n\nThe pyramidal motor system, also called the pyramidal tract or the corticospinal tract, start in the motor center of the cerebral cortex. There are upper and lower motor neurons in the corticospinal tract. The motor impulses originate in the giant pyramidal cells or Betz cells of the motor area; i.e., precentral gyrus of cerebral cortex. These are the upper motor neurons (UMN) of the corticospinal tract. The axons of these cells pass in the depth of the cerebral cortex to the corona radiata and then to the internal capsule passing through the posterior branch of internal capsule and continue to descend in the midbrain and the medulla oblongata. In the lower part of Medulla oblongata 80 to 85% of these fibers decussate (pass to the opposite side) and descend in the white matter of the lateral funiculus of the spinal cord on the opposite side. The remaining 15 to 20% pass to the same side. Fibers for the extremities (limbs) pass 100% to the opposite side.\nThe fibers of the corticospinal tract terminate at different levels in the anterior horn of the grey matter of the spinal cord. Here the lower motor neurons (LMN) of the corticospinal cord are located.\nPeripheral motor nerves carry the motor impulses from the anterior horn to the voluntary muscles.\n\nThe extrapyramidal motor system consists of motor-modulation systems, particularly the basal ganglia and cerebellum. For information see extrapyramidal system.\n\n", "id": "232388", "title": "Motor system"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22633377", "text": "Comparative foot morphology\n\nComparative foot morphology involves comparing the form of distal limb structures of a variety of terrestrial vertebrates. Understanding the role that the foot plays for each type of organism must take account of the differences in body type, foot shape, arrangement of structures, loading conditions and other variables. However, similarities also exist among the feet of many different terrestrial vertebrates. The paw of the dog, the hoof of the horse, the \"manus\" (foot) and \"pes\" (foot) of the elephant, and the foot of the human all share some common features of structure, organization and function. Their foot structures function as the load-transmission platform which is essential to balance, standing and types of locomotion (such as walking, trotting, galloping and running).\n\nThe discipline of biomimetics applies the information gained by comparing the foot morphology of a variety of terrestrial vertebrates to human-engineering problems. For instance, it may provide insights that make it possible to alter the foot's load transmission in people who wear an external orthosis because of paralysis from spinal-cord injury, or who use a prosthesis following the diabetes-related amputation of a leg. Such knowledge can be incorporated in technology that improves a person's balance when standing; enables them to walk more efficiently, and to exercise; or otherwise enhances their quality of life by improving their mobility.\n\nLimb and foot structure of representative terrestrial vertebrates:\n\nThere is considerable variation in the scale and proportions of body and limb, as well as the nature of loading, during standing and locomotion both among and between quadrupeds and bipeds. The anterior-posterior body mass distribution varies considerably among mammalian quadrupeds, which affects limb loading. When standing, many terrestrial quadrupeds support more of their weight on their forelimbs rather than their hind limbs; however, the distribution of body mass and limb loading changes when they move. Humans have a lower-limb mass that is greater than their upper-limb mass. The hind limbs of the dog and horse have a slightly greater mass than the forelimbs, whereas the elephant has proportionally longer limbs. The elephant's forelimbs are longer than its hind limbs.\n\nIn the horse and dog, the hind limbs play an important role in primary propulsion. The legged locomotion of humans generally distributes an equal loading on each lower limb. The locomotion of the elephant (which is the largest terrestrial vertebrate) displays a similar loading distribution on its hind limbs and forelimbs. The walking and running gaits of quadrupeds and bipeds show differences in the relative phase of the movements of their forelimbs and hind limbs, as well as of their right-side limbs versus their left-side limbs. Many of the aforementioned variables are connected with differences in the scaling of body and limb dimension as well as in patterns of limb coordination and movement. However, little is understood concerning the functional contribution of the foot and its structures during the weight-bearing phase. The comparative morphology of the distal limb and foot structure of some representative terrestrial vertebrates reveals some interesting similarities.\n\nEven many terrestrial vertebrates exhibit differences in the scaling of limb dimension, limb coordination and magnitude of forelimb-hind limb loading, in the dog, horse and elephant the structure of the distal forelimb is similar to that of the distal hind limb. In the human, the structures of the hand are generally similar in shape and arrangement to those of the foot. Terrestrial vertebrate quadrupeds and bipeds generally possess distal limb and foot endoskeleton structures that are aligned in series, stacked in a relatively vertical orientation and arranged in a quasi-columnar fashion in the extended limb. In the dog and horse, the bones of the proximal limbs are oriented vertically, whereas the distal limb structures of the ankle and foot have an angulated orientation. In humans and elephants, a vertical-column orientation of the bones in the limbs and feet is also evident for associated skeletal muscle-tendon units. The horse’s foot contains an external nail (hoof) oriented about the perimeter in the shape of a semicircle. The underlying bones are arranged in a semi-vertical orientation. The dog’s paw similarly contains bones arranged in a semi-vertical orientation.\n\nIn the human and the elephant, the column orientation of the foot complex is replaced in humans by a plantigrade orientation, and in elephants by a semi-plantigrade alignment of the hind limb foot structure. This difference in orientation in the foot bones and joints of humans and elephants helps them to adapt to variations in the terrain.\n\nMany representative terrestrial vertebrates possess a distal cushion on the under-surface of the foot. The dog's paw contains a number of visco-elastic pads oriented along the middle and distal foot. The horse possesses a centralized digital pad known as the frog, which is located at the distal aspect of the foot and surrounded by the hoof. Humans possess a tough fibro and elastic pad of fat that is anchored to the skin and bone of the rear portion of the foot.\n\nThe foot of the elephant possesses what is perhaps one of the most unusual distal cushions found in vertebrates. The forefoot (\"manus\") and hindfoot (\"pes\") contain huge pads of fat that are scaled to cope with the massive loadings imposed by the largest terrestrial vertebrate. In addition, a cartilage-like projection (prepollex in the forelimb and prehallux in the hind limb) appears to anchor the distal cushion to the bones of the elephant's foot.\n\nThe distal cushions of all these organisms (dog, horse, human and elephant) are dynamic structures during locomotion, alternating between phases of compression and expansion; it has been suggested that these structures thereby reduce the loads experienced by the skeletal system.\n\nArrangement of foot structures:\n\nBecause of the wide variety in body types, scaling and morphology of the distal limbs of terrestrial vertebrates, there exists a degree of controversy concerning the nature and organization of foot structures. One organizational approach to understanding foot structures makes distinctions regarding their regional anatomy. The foot structures are divided into segments from proximal to distal and are grouped according to similarity in shape, dimension and function. In this approach, the foot may be described in three segments: as the hindfoot, midfoot and forefoot.\n\nThe hindfoot is the most proximal and posterior portion of the foot. Functionally, the structures contained in this region are typically robust, possessing a larger size and girth than the other structures of the foot. The structures of the hindfoot are usually adapted for transmitting large loads between the proximal and distal aspects of the limb when the foot contacts the ground. This is apparent in the human and elephant foot, where the hindfoot undergoes greater loading during initial contact in many forms of locomotion. The hindfoot structures of the dog and horse are located relatively proximally compared to the elephant and human foot.\n\nThe midfoot is the intermediate portion of the foot between the hindfoot and forefoot. The structures in this region are intermediate in size, and typically transmit loads from the hindfoot to the forefoot. The human transverse tarsal joint of the midfoot transmits forces from the subtalar joint in the hindfoot to the forefoot joints (metatarsophalangeal and interphalangeal) and associated bones (metatarsals and phalanges). The midfoot of the dog, horse and elephant contains similar intermediate structures having similar functions to those of the human midfoot.\n\nThe forefoot represents the most distal portion of the foot. In the human and elephant, the bone structures contained in this region are generally longer and narrower. The structures of the forefoot play a role in providing leverage for terminal stance propulsion and load transfer.\n\nLoad transmission of the foot in representative terrestrial vertebrates:\n\nThe paw of the dog has a digitigrade orientation. The vertical columnar orientation of the proximal bones of the limbs, which articulate with distal foot structures that are arranged in quasi-vertical columnar orientation, is well-aligned to transmit loadings during weight-bearing contact of the skeleton with the ground. The angled orientation of the elongated metatarsal and the digits extends the area available for storing and releasing mechanical energy in the muscle tendon units originating proximally to the ankle joint and terminating at the distal aspect of the foot bones. When muscle tendon units lengthen, the load strain facilitates mechanical activity. These muscle tendon unit structures appear well designed to aid in the ground-reaction transmission of forces that is essential for locomotion. In addition, the pads of the distal paw appear to allow load attenuation, by enhancing shock absorption during the paw's contact with the ground.\n\nThe horse's foot is in an unguligrade orientation. The columnar orientation of bones and connective tissue is similarly well-aligned to transmit loads during the weight-bearing phase of locomotion. The thick keratinized and semicircular hoof changes shape during loading and unloading. Similarly, the cushioned frog situated centrally at the rear ends of the hoof undergoes compression during loading, and expansion when unloaded. Together, the hoof and cushioned frog structures may work in concert with hoof capsule to provide shock absorption. The horse hoof also acts dynamically during loading, which may cushion the endoskeleton from high loads that would otherwise produce critical deformation.\n\nThe hind limb and foot of the elephant are oriented semi-plantigrade, and closely resemble the structure and function of the human foot. The tarsals and metapodials are arranged so as to form an arch, similarly to the human foot. The six toes of each foot of the elephant are enclosed in a flexible sheath of skin. Similar to the dog's paw, the elephant's phalanges are oriented in a downward direction. The distal phalanges of the elephant do not directly touch the ground, and are attached to the respective nail/hoof. Distal cushions occupy the spaces between the muscle tendon units and ligaments within the hindfoot, midfoot and forefoot bones on the plantar surface. The distal cushion is highly innervated by sensory structures (Meissner's and Pacinian corpuscles), making the distal foot one of the most sensitive structures of the elephant (more so than its trunk). The cushions of the elephant's foot respond to the requirement to store and absorb mechanical loads when they are compressed, and to distribute locomotor loads over a large area in order to keep foot tissue stresses within acceptable levels. In addition, the musculoskeletal foot arch and sole cushion of the elephant act in concert, similarly to the horse's cushioned frog and hoof and the human foot. In the elephant, the nearly half-cupula-shaped arrangement of the bony elements of the metatarsals and toes has interesting similarities to the structure of the arches of human feet.\n\nRecently, scientists at the Royal Veterinary College in the United Kingdom have discovered that the elephant possesses a sixth false toe, a sesamoid, located similarly to the giant panda's extra \"thumb\". They found that this sixth toe acts to support and distribute the weight of the elephant.\n\nThe unique plantigrade alignment of the human foot results in a distal-limb structure that can adapt to a variety of conditions. The less mobile and more robust tarsal bones are shaped and aligned to accept and transmit large loads during the early phases of stance (initial contact and loading response phases of walking, and inadvertent heel strikes during running). The tarsals of the midfoot, which are smaller and shorter than the hindfoot tarsals, appear well oriented to transmit loads between the hindfoot and forefoot; this is necessary for load transfer and locking of the foot complex into a rigid lever for late stance phase. Conversely, the midfoot bones and joints also allow for the transmission of loads and inter-joint movement that unlocks the foot to create a loosely packed structure which renders the foot highly compliant over a variety of surfaces. In this configuration, the foot is able to absorb and damp the large loads encountered during heel strike and early weight acceptance. The forefoot, with its long metatarsal and relatively long phalanges, transmits loads during the end-of-stance phase that facilitate the push-off and transfer of forward momentum. The forefoot also serves as a lever to allow balance during standing and jumping. In addition, the arches of the foot that span the hindfoot, midfoot and forefoot play a critical role in the nature of transformation of the foot from a rigid lever to a flexible weight-accepting structure.\n\nWith a running gait, the foot-loading order is usually the reverse of walking. The foot strikes the ground with the ball of the foot, and then the heel drops. The heel drop elastically extends the Achilles tendon; this extension is reversed during the push-off.\n\nVeterinarian or human healthcare professionals often respond when the foot of a dog, horse, elephant or human develops an abnormality. They typically investigate to understand the nature of the pathology in order to generate and implement a clinical treatment plan. For instance, the paws of the dog and the hindfoot work together to absorb the shock of jumping and running, and to provide flexibility of movement. If the dog's skeletal structures in areas other than the foot are compromised, the foot may be burdened with compensatory loading. Structural faults such as straight or loose shoulders, straight stifles, loose hips, and lack of balance between the forefoot and hindfoot, can all cause gait abnormalities that in turn damage the hindfoot and paws by overloading their foot structures as they compensate for the structural faults.\n\nIn the horse, dryness of the hoof may cause stiffening of the external foot structure. The stiffer hoof reduces the foot's load attenuation capacity, rendering the horse unable to bear much weight on the distal limb. Similar characteristic features emerge in the human foot in the form of the \"pes cavus\" alignment deformity, which is produced by tight connective tissue structures and joint congruency that create a rigid foot complex. Individuals with \"pes cavus\" display characteristic reduced load-attenuation features, and other structures proximal to the foot may compensate with increased load transfer (i.e., excessive loading to the knees, hips, lumbo-pelvic joints or lumbar vertebrae). Foot disorders are common in captive elephants. However, the cause is poorly understood.\n\n", "id": "22633377", "title": "Comparative foot morphology"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42457469", "text": "Lister's tubercle\n\nLister's tubercle or dorsal tubercle of radius is a bony prominence located at the distal end of the radius, palpable on the dorsum of the wrist.\n\nLister's tubercle serves as a pulley for the tendon of extensor pollicis longus, which wraps around the medial side and takes a 45 degree turn.\n", "id": "42457469", "title": "Lister's tubercle"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42860543", "text": "Sauropod neck posture\n\nSauropod neck posture is a subject occasionally debated among scientists, who consider either a horizontal, or upright posture to be how the necks were held habitually.\n\nThe biomechanics of sauropod skeletons and necks can help determine at what angle the neck was positioned.\n\nIn 2013, a study led by Matthew J. Cobley and published in PLOS ONE focused on the flexibility of the necks of sauropods. They compared the necks of ostriches with sauropod genera to find out how flexible the necks really were. The study noted that previous biomechanics studies found the necks to have been positioned between the extremes of a vertical, and a downward slanted neck. In conclusion, the study found that sauropod neck flexibility should not be based on osteology alone, and if it is, the results should be used with caution. Even though there is a lack of preserved muscle tissue that would determine flexibility, sauropod necks were probably less flexible than previously thought.\n\nIn 2014, Mike P. Taylor analysed the flexibility in the necks of \"Apatosaurus\" and \"Diplodocus\". He found that Cobley \"et al.\" was incorrect in the fact that vertebrae imply the neck is less flexible than in actuality. Cobley \"et al.\" found necks to be much less flexible than in reality when cartilage was added. It was found that the cartilage between the joints would have allowed for the neck to flex far past 90°. However, Taylor noted that the neck, while it could flex above the vertical, the osteological neutral pose would have been around horizontal, and the habitual pose would have held the head upwards in an alert pose.\n\nSauropod necks were probably highly muscled to suit their feeding level. \"Brachiosaurus brancai\" (now \"Giraffititan\") was probably a high browser, so it would have been more muscled along the neck than other sauropods like \"Diplodocus\" and \"Dicraeosaurus\" who were low browsers. The tail and limb length of \"B. brancai\" would also need to be greater, to balance out the inclined neck. However, the question of whether sauropods were endothermic or ectothermic plays a major part in how sauropods were muscled, as endotherms have particularly more intestines and stomach than ectotherms. The amount of gut needed could determine how much food was eaten by sauropods, and therefore at what elevation their heads were held.\n\nThe previous upright posture of sauropod necks would require great blood pressure and a strong heart. One 2000 study conducted by Roger Seymour and Harvey Lillywhite found that the blood pressure needed to reach the head with an upright neck would be . This could be fatal to an endotherm, and also highly dangerous to an ectotherm. If sauropods were endothermic metabolically, it would certainly be impossible for them to survive with upright necks, as the blood pressure would be too high to live even with thicker heart muscling. A later study by Seymour concluded that it would have required half the energy of any particular sauropod to pump the blood to the head. This would lower the probability of sauropods being high browsers, and instead having lower necks while feeding than commonly portrayed.\n\nA few hypotheses have been generated to solve the dispute over how sauropods held their necks.\n\nKent Stevens and Michael Parrish are the two main supporters of a horizontal neck posture. In 1999, they studied the genera \"Apatosaurus\" and \"Diplodocus\", finding the habitual pose of the genera to be slightly declined. They claimed that both sauropods had necks much less flexible than previously thought, with the neck vertebrae of \"Diplodocus\" being more inflexible than \"Apatosaurus\". Those two poses would suggest that the sauropods were ground feeders, instead of browsing off taller flora.\nLater, in 2005, Stevens and Parrish again studied the biomechanics of sauropod necks, but this time on a wider variety of sauropods, those inhabiting the Jurassic. Specifically, \"Apatosaurus\", \"Diplodocus\", \"Camarasaurus\", \"Brachiosaurus\", \"Dicraeosaurus\", \"Cetiosaurus\", and \"Euhelopus\" were studied, and each and every one was stated to have a horizontally held neck by Stevens and Parrish. The pair even went as far a saying that all but a few had necks that curved downward towards the head. However, in 2009 multiple things were found to be incorrect with this hypothesis. Michael P. Taylor \"et al.\" compared the neck posture of sauropods to that of extant reptiles, finding the habitual pose of different sauropods to be quite different from the hypothesis of Stevens and Parrish, including an upright neck for \"Diplodocus\". The inaccuracies of Stevens and Parrish come mostly from their thought about the habitual pose, which was, according to them, the Osteological Neutral Pose (or ONP) of every sauropod. Taylor \"et al.\" find the ONP not to be the habitual pose, far from it, but just the midpoint between the two structural extremes of the neck orientation.\n\nAnother, more widely supported hypothesis about sauropod neck posture is that the necks were held at an incline, but not as upright as commonly shown. Daniela Schwartz \"et al.\" in 2006 published a study of the scapula and coracoids, sometimes fused into scapulocoracoids, of sauropod genera. Previously, sauropod shoulder girdles were thought to have been positioned horizontally along the torso, but Schwartz \"et al.\" found that the girdles should not have been positioned horizontally, and instead, they would have been angled at an average of 55° to 65°. The study reconstructed the skeletons of \"Diplodocus\", \"Camarasaurus\", and the titanosaur \"Opisthocoelicaudia\", all known from a complete shoulder girdle, with the correct orientation of the scapulocoracoids. For \"Diplodocus\", a 60° shoulder blade would have meant that the neck was more-or-less horizontal, not too much different from the horizontal pose. A juvenile \"Camarasaurus\" found by Gilmore was originally described as having the scapulocoracoid in \"just the right place\", but with it oriented at an angle of 45°, Schwartz \"et al.\" criticized the stance. The skeleton found by Schwartz \"et al.\" with the angle of the scapulocoracoid is similar to previous reconstruction of the genus by Osborn and Mook, and Jensen. \"Opisthocoelicaudia\" was found to have had two possibly poses, both with the scapulocoracoid angled at about 60°. No previous reconstructions, unlike with \"Camarasaurus\", have restored \"Opisthocoelicaudia\" similarly.\n\n\"Euhelopus\" and \"Brachiosaurus\" have been found to be among only a few sauropods to hold their necks at a vertical angle, which would have been impossible for other sauropods. Many studies have stated that the blood pressure and energy spent would have been too great to survive, but for \"Euhelopus\" and \"Brachiosaurus\" it would have suited them better. The energy spent by pumping blood to the head would probably be too great for sauropods, but when they travel often, which has been suggested for those two genera, it would have actually saved energy. The biomechanical evidence favours an upright neck when travelling to spread apart resources. The study finding this conclusion also tested how much energy would have been expended when walking and standing, both with an upright neck. The approximate conclusion was that an about equal amount of energy would have been used up. Elongated cervical ribs are skeletal evidence for a strong core to support the neck and limit its movement when walking. The study supports the idea that during times of drought and famine, an upright neck was crucial for these sauropods to survive.\n", "id": "42860543", "title": "Sauropod neck posture"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2451591", "text": "Prone position\n\nProne position () is a body position in which one lies flat with the chest down and the back up. In anatomical terms of location, the dorsal side is up, and the ventral side is down. The supine position is the 180° contrast.\n\nThe word \"prone,\" meaning \"naturally inclined to something, apt, liable,\" has been recorded in English since 1382; the meaning \"lying face-down\" was first recorded in 1578, but is also referred to as \"lying down\" or \"going prone.\"\n\n\"Prone\" derives from the Latin \"pronus\": \"bent forward, inclined to,\" from the adverbial form of the prefix \"pro-\" \"forward.\" Both the original, literal, and the derived figurative sense were used in Latin, but the figurative is older in English.\n\nIn anatomy, the prone position is a position of the body lying face down. It is opposed to the supine position which is face up. Using the terms defined in the anatomical position, the ventral side is down, and the dorsal side is up.\n\nWith respect to the forearm, prone refers to that configuration where the palm of the hand is directed posteriorly, and the radius and ulna are crossed.\n\nIn competitive shooting, the prone position is the position of a shooter lying face down on the ground. It is considered the easiest and most accurate position as the ground provides extra stability. It is the starting position in three positions events. Currently the Olympics only have one purely prone event, the fifty meters men's rifle prone. Both men and women also have the fifty meters rifle three positions. Many video games (particularly first-person shooters) allow the player character to go into the prone position.\n\nMale shooters shoot a .22 LR calibre rifle (smallbore) over a course of fire of 60 shots to count, after unlimited sighting shots, in a time limit of 1 hour and 15 minutes (when using electronic targets). If necessary, an 'elimination' course of fire may be undertaken to reduce the number of shooters to the number that may fire simultaneously in a 'qualification' round. Each shot may score from 0 to 10 points, with no decimal points (e.g. 0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10, but not 3.2 or 9.8 etc.) The maximum score for an elimination or qualification round is 600 points. The top 8 shooters in the qualification round will be selected to shoot 'shot-for-shot' in an 'Olympic' final. The final is 10 shots, shot after a five-minute period for unlimited sighters. The 10 shots are shot on command in a 45-second time-span, where each shooter must shoot one shot. Following each individual finals shot, the individual shooter's score for that shot is read to the audience. Shots in the final are scored to one decimal place, e.g. a shooter may score 9.8 or 10.6 in the finals for a shot, whereas in the qualification or elimination round those same shots would score 9 or 10 respectively. The maximum score for 10 shots in the finals is 109.0, with 10.9 being the maximum score for each shot. The Finals score for the 10 shots is added to the score for the qualification round.\n\nThe UK national shooting body also has courses of fire for prone shooting at multiple distances and targets. Commonly, this is split into what is known as 'short' and 'long' ranges.\n\nThe NSRA generally refers to shooting .22 LR calibre rifles over a distance of between 15 yards and 25 metres 'indoors' as being short range shooting. Targets are generally outward gauging (touching a ring on the target scores the lower of the two adjacent scores), except on some of the Schools and older targets (e.g. 5 bull targets). Being indoors, no allowance is necessary for wind, light or other changes. Shots are scored as decimal values from 0 to 10, with no decimal places.\n\nUK Long range shooting is generally over either 50 yards, 50 metres or 100 yards distance outdoors. Targets vary, but generally the ISSF 50M (scaled) is used for 50 yards or 50 metres and a proportional sized target is used for 100 yards. A 50-yard, 50-metre or 100-yard target is generally constructed to allow 20 shots to count, to be executed during one 'detail' of 20 minutes duration. Sighting shots are included in that time period.\n\nOutdoors, variables such as light, wind, temperature, humidity and mirage affect the target image and bullet trajectory. To help shooters, most ranges have wind flags placed at useful positions around the range to display the wind conditions.\n\nThe prone position is also used to describe the way pilots and other crew may be positioned in an aircraft; lying on their stomachs rather than seated in a normal upright position. During World War II, the bomb aimer in some bombers would be positioned this way to be better able to view the ground through a transparent panel or bubble in the nose of a bomber. Later, it was suggested that a pilot in the prone position might be more effective in some kinds of high-speed aircraft, because it would permit the pilot to withstand a greater \"g\"-force in the upward and downward direction with respect to the plane, and many speculative designs of the 1950s featured this arrangement. However, it never became mainstream, as testing revealed that the increased difficulty of operating aircraft controls in the prone position outweighed the advantages. Two examples of this approach are seen in the Savoia-Marchetti SM.93 and the Gloster Meteor F8 \"Prone Pilot\". Modern hang gliders are typically piloted in the prone position.\n\n\n", "id": "2451591", "title": "Prone position"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=168041", "text": "Anatomical terms of location\n\nStandard anatomical terms of location deal unambiguously with the anatomy of animals, including humans.\n\nAll vertebrates (including humans) have the same basic body plan they are strictly bilaterally symmetrical in early embryonic stages and largely bilaterally symmetrical in adulthood. That is, they have mirror-image left and right halves if divided down the centre. For these reasons, the basic directional terms can be considered to be those used in vertebrates. By extension, the same terms are used for many other (invertebrate) organisms as well.\n\nWhile these terms are standardized within specific fields of biology, there are unavoidable, sometimes dramatic, differences between some disciplines. For example, differences in terminology remain a problem that, to some extent, still separates the terminology of human anatomy from that used in the study of various other zoological categories.\n\nStandardized anatomical and zoological terms of location have been developed, usually based on Latin and Greek words, to enable all biological and medical scientists to precisely delineate and communicate information about animal bodies and their component organs, even though the meaning of some of the terms often is context-sensitive.\n\nThe vertebrates and \"Craniata\" share a substantial heritage and common structure, so many of the same terms are used to describe location. To avoid ambiguities this terminology is based on the anatomy of each animal in a standard way.\n\nFor humans, one type of vertebrate, anatomical terms may differ from other forms of vertebrates. For one reason, this is because humans have a different neuraxis and, unlike animals that rest on four limbs, humans are considered when describing anatomy as being in the standard anatomical position. Thus what is on \"top\" of a human is the head, whereas the \"top\" of a dog may be its back, and the \"top\" of a flounder could refer to either its left or its right side.\n\nFor invertebrates, standard application of locational terminology often becomes difficult or debatable at best when the differences in morphology are so radical that common concepts are not homologous and do not refer to common concepts. For example, many species are not even bilaterally symmetrical. In these species, terminology depends on their type of symmetry (if any).\n\nBecause animals can change orientation with respect to their environment, and because appendages like limbs and tentacles can change position with respect to the main body, positional descriptive terms need to refer to the animal as in its standard anatomical position. All descriptions are with respect to the organism in its standard anatomical position, even when the organism in question has appendages in another position. This helps avoid confusion in terminology when referring to the same organism in different postures.\n\nIn humans, this refers to the body in a standing position with arms at the side and palms facing forward (thumbs out). While the universal vertebrate terminology used in veterinary medicine would work in human medicine, the human terms are thought to be too well established to be worth changing.\n\nMany anatomical terms can be combined, either to indicate a position in two axes simultaneously or to indicate the direction of a movement relative to the body. For example, \"anterolateral\" indicates a position that is both anterior and lateral to the body axis (such as the bulk of the pectoralis major muscle). In radiology, an X-ray image may be said to be \"anteroposterior\", indicating that the beam of X-rays pass from their source to patient's anterior body wall through the body to exit through posterior body wall.\n\nThere is no definite limit to the contexts in which terms may be modified to qualify each other in such combinations. Generally the modifier term is truncated and an \"o\" or an \"i\" is added in prefixing it to the qualified term. For example, a view of an animal from an aspect at once dorsal and lateral might be called a \"dorsolateral\" view; and the effect of dorsolateral flattening in an organism such as a krait gives its body a triangular cross section. Again, in describing the morphology of an organ or habitus of an animal such as many of the Platyhelminthes, one might speak of it as \"dorsiventrally\" flattened as opposed to bilaterally flattened animals such as ocean sunfish.\n\nWhere desirable three or more terms may be agglutinated or concatenated, as in \"anteriodorsolateral\". Such terms sometimes used to be hyphenated, but the modern tendency is to omit the hyphen. There is however little basis for any strict rule to interfere with choice of convenience in such usage.\n\nThree basic reference planes are used to describe location.\n\n\n\nTo begin with, distinct, polar-opposite ends of the organism are chosen. By definition, each pair of opposite points defines an axis. In a bilaterally symmetrical organism, there are 6 polar opposite points, giving three axes that intersect at right angles the x, y, and z axes familiar from three-dimensional geometry.\n\nThe terms \"intermediate\", \"ipsilateral\", \"contralateral\", \"superficial\", and \"deep\", while indicating directions, are relative terms and thus do not properly define fixed anatomical axes. Also, while the \"rostrocaudal\" and anteroposterior directionality are equivalent in a significant portion of the human body, they are different directions in other parts of the body.\n\nIn anatomical terminology superior () is used to refer to what is above something, and inferior () to what is below it. For example, in the anatomical position the most superior part of the human body is the head, and the most inferior is the feet. As a second example, in humans the neck is superior to the chest but inferior to the head.\n\nAnterior refers to what is in front (, meaning \"before\") and posterior, what is to the back of the subject (, meaning \"after\"). For example, in a dog the nose is anterior to the eyes and the tail is considered the most posterior part; in many fish the gill openings are posterior to the eyes, but anterior to the tail.\n\nLateral () refers to the sides of an animal, as in \"left lateral\" and \"right lateral\". The term medial () is used to refer to structures close to the centre of an organism, called the \"median plane\". For example, in a human, imagine a line down the center of the body from the head though the navel and going between the legs— the medial side of the foot would be the big toe side; the medial side of the knee would be the side adjacent to the other knee. To describe the sides of the knees touching each other would be \"right medial\" and \"left medial\".\n\nThe terms \"left\" and \"right\" are sometimes used, or their Latin alternatives (; \"right\", ; \"left\"). However, as left and right sides are mirror images, using these words is somewhat confusing, as structures are duplicated on both sides. For example, it's very confusing to say the dorsal fin of a dolphin is \"right of\" the left pectoral fin, but is \"left of\" the right eye, but much easier and clearer to say \"the dorsal fin is medial to the pectoral fins\".\n\nDerived terms include:\n\n\nVarus and valgus correspond to medial and lateral, respectively, regarding the distal segment's vector relative to the proximal segment's vector.\n\nThe terms proximal () and distal () are used to describe parts of a feature that are close to or distant from the main mass of the body, respectively. Thus the upper arm in humans is proximal and the hand is distal.\n\nThese terms are particularly useful when describing appendages such as fins, tentacles, limbs or indeed any structure that extends that can potentially move separately from the main body. Although the direction indicated by \"proximal\" and \"distal\" is always respectively towards or away from the point of attachment, a given structure can be either proximal or distal in relation to another point of reference. Thus the elbow is distal to a wound on the upper arm, but proximal to a wound on the lower arm.\n\nThis terminology is also employed in molecular biology and therefore by extension is also used in chemistry. Specifically as referring to the atomic loci of molecules from the overall moiety of a given compound.\n\nCentral and peripheral are terms that are closely related to concepts such as proximal and distal, but they are so widely applicable that in many respects their flexibility makes them hard to define. Loosely speaking, they distinguish near and far, inside and out, or even organs of vital importance such as heart and lungs, from peripheral organs such as fingers, that undoubtedly may be important, but which it may not be life-threatening to dispense with. Examples of the application of the terms are the distinction between central- and peripheral nervous systems, and between peripheral blood vessels and the central circulatory organs, such as the heart and major vessels. The terms also can apply to large and complex molecules such as proteins, where central amino acid residues are protected from antibodies or the like, but peripheral residues are important in docking and other interactions. Other examples include \"Central and peripheral circadian clocks\", and \"central versus peripheral vision\".\n\nThese two terms relate to the distance of a structure from the surface of an animal.\n\nDeep () refers to something further away from the surface of the organism. For example, the external oblique muscle of the abdomen is deep to the skin. \"Deep\" is one of the few anatomical terms of location derived from Old English rather than Latin – the anglicised Latin term would have been \"profound\" ().\n\nSuperficial () refers to something near the outer surface of the organism. For example, in skin the epidermis is superficial to the subcutis.\n\nThese two terms, used in anatomy and embryology, refer to back (\"dorsal\") and front or belly (\"ventral\") of an organism.\n\nThe dorsal () surface of an organism refers to the back, or upper side, of an organism. If talking about the skull, the dorsal side is the top.\n\nThe ventral () surface refers to the front, or lower side, of an organism.\n\nFor example, in a fish the pectoral fins are dorsal to the anal fin, but ventral to the dorsal fin.\n\nSpecific terms exist to describe how close or far something is to the head or tail of an animal. To describe how close to the head of an animal something is, three distinct terms are used:\n\n\nFor example, in the horse, the eyes are caudal to the nose and rostral to the back of the head.\n\nThese terms are generally preferred in veterinary medicine and not used as often in human medicine. In humans, \"cranial\" and \"cephalic\" are used to refer to the skull, with \"cranial\" being used more commonly. The term \"rostral\" is rarely used in human anatomy, apart from embryology, and refers more to the front of the face than the superior aspect of the organism. Similarly, the term \"caudal\" is only occasionally used in human anatomy. This is because the brain is situated at the superior part of the head whereas the nose is situated in the anterior part. Thus the \"rostrocaudal axis\" refers to a C shape (see image).\n\nThe location of anatomical structures can also be described with relation to different anatomical landmarks.\n\nStructures may be described as being at the level of a specific spinal vertebra, depending on the section of the vertebral column the structure is at. The position is often abbreviated. For example, structures at the level of the fourth cervical vertebra may be abbreviated as \"C4\", at the level of a thoracic vertebra \"T4\", at the level of a lumbar vertebra \"L3\". Because the sacrum and coccyx are fused, they are not often used to provide location.\n\nReferences may also take origin from superficial anatomy, made to landmarks that are on the skin or visible underneath. For example, structures may be described relative to the anterior superior iliac spine, the medial malleolus or the medial epicondyle.\n\nAnatomical lines, theoretical lines drawn through structures, are also used to describe anatomical location. For example, the mid-clavicular line is used as part of the cardiac exam in medicine to feel the apex beat of the heart.\n\nFields such as osteology, palaeontology and dentistry apply special terms of location to describe the mouth and teeth. This is because although teeth may be aligned with their main axes within the jaw, some different relationships require special terminology as well; for example teeth also can be rotated, and in such contexts terms like \"anterior\" or \"lateral\" become ambiguous. Terms such as \"distal\" and \"proximal\" are also redefined to mean the distance away or close to the mandibular symphysis. Terms used to describe structures include \"buccal\" () and \"palatal\" () referring to structures close to the cheek and hard palate respectively.\n\nSeveral anatomical terms are particular to the hands and feet\n\nFor improved clarity, the directional term palmar () is usually used to describe the front of the hand, and dorsal is the back of the hand. For example, the top of a dog's paw is its dorsal surface; the underside, either the palmar (on the forelimb) or the plantar (on the hindlimb) surface. The palmar fascia is palmar to the tendons of muscles which flex the fingers, and the dorsal venous arch is so named because it is on the dorsal side of the foot.\n\nVolar can also be used to refer to the underside of the palm or sole, which are themselves also sometimes used to describe location as \"palmar\" and \"plantar\". For example, volar pads are those on the underside of hands, fingers, feet, and toes.\n\nThese terms are used to avoid confusion when describing the median surface of the hand and what is the \"anterior\" or \"posterior\" surface \"anterior\" can be used to describe the palm of the hand, and \"posterior\" can be used to describe the back of the hand and arm. This confusion can arise because the forearm can pronate and supinate.\n\nSimilarly, in the forearm, for clarity, the sides are named after the bones. Structures closer to the radius are radial, structures closer to the ulna are ulnar, and structures relating to both bones are referred to as radioulnar. Similarly, in the lower leg, structures near the tibia (shinbone) are tibial and structures near the fibula are fibular (or peroneal).\n\nMost terms of anatomical location are relative to linear motion (translation) along the X- Y- and Z-axes, but there are other degrees of freedom as well, in particular, rotation around any of those three axes.\n\nAnteversion and retroversion are complementary anatomical terms of location, describing the degree to which an anatomical structure is rotated forwards (towards the front of the body) or backwards (towards the back of the body) respectively, relative to some datum position. The terms also describe the positioning of surgical implants, such as in arthroplasty.\n\n\nSeveral other terms are also used to describe location. These terms are not used to form the fixed axes. Terms include:\n\nDirectional and locational prefixes can modify many anatomical and morphological terms, sometimes in formally standard usage, but often attached arbitrarily according to need or convenience.\n\nPrefixes\n\nSuffixes\nCommonly when, for example, one anatomical feature is nearer to something than another, one may use an expression such as \"nearer the distal end\" or \"distal to\". However, an unambiguous and concise convention is to use the Latin suffix \"-ad\", meaning \"towards\", or sometimes \"to\". So for example, \"\"distad\"\" means \"in the distal direction\", and \"distad of the femur\" means \"beyond the femur in the distal direction\". The suffix may be used very widely, as in the following examples: anteriad (towards the anterior), apicad (towards the apex), basad (towards the basal end), caudad, centrad, cephalad (towards the cephalic end), craniad, dextrad, dextrocaudad, dextrocephalad, distad, dorsad, ectad (towards the ectal, or exterior, direction), entad (towards the interior), laterad, mediad, mesad, neurad, orad, posteriad, proximad, rostrad, sinistrad, sinistrocaudad, sinistrocephalad, ventrad\".\"\n\nThe large variety of body shapes present in invertebrates presents a difficult problem when attempting to apply standard directional terms. Depending on the organism, some terms are taken by analogy from vertebrate anatomy, and appropriate novel terms are applied as needed. Some such borrowed terms are widely applicable in most invertebrates; for example proximal, literally meaning \"near\" refers to the part of an appendage nearest to where it joins the body, and distal, literally meaning \"standing away from\" is used for the part furthest from the point of attachment. In all cases, the usage of terms is dependent on the body plan of the organism.\n\nFor example, especially in organisms without distinct heads for reasons of broader applicability, \"anterior\" is usually preferred.\n\nAs humans are approximately bilaterally symmetrical organisms, anatomical descriptions usually use the same terms as those for vertebrates and other members of the taxonomic group Bilateria. However, for historical and other reasons, standard human directional terminology has several differences from that used for other bilaterally symmetrical organisms.\n\nThe terms of zootomy and anatomy came into use at a time when all scientific communication took place in Latin. In their original Latin forms the respective meanings of \"anterior\" and \"posterior\" are \"in front of\" (or \"before\") and \"behind\" (or \"after\"), those of \"dorsal\" and \"ventral\" are \"toward the spine\" and \"toward the belly\", and those of \"superior\" and \"inferior\" are \"above\" and \"below\".\n\nHumans, however, have the rare property of having an upright torso. This makes their anterior/posterior and dorsal/ventral directions the same, and the inferior/superior directions necessary.\n\nMost animals, furthermore, are capable of moving relative to their environment. So while \"up\" might refer to the direction of a standing human's head, the same term (\"up\") might be used to refer to the direction of the belly of a supine human. It is also necessary to employ some specific anatomical knowledge in order to apply the terminology unambiguously: For example, while the ears would be \"superior\" to (above) the shoulders in a human, this fails when describing the armadillo, where the shoulders are above the ears. Thus, in veterinary terminology, the ears would be \"cranial\" to (i.e., \"toward the head from\") the shoulders in the armadillo, the dog, the kangaroo, or any other terrestrial vertebrate, including the human. Likewise, while the belly is considered \"anterior\" to (in front of) the back in humans, this terminology fails for the flounder, the armadillo, and the dog. In veterinary terms, the belly would be \"ventral\" (\"toward the abdomen\") in all vertebrates.\n\nWhile it would be possible to introduce a system of axes that is completely consistent between humans and other vertebrates by having two separate pairs of axes, one used exclusively for the head (e.g., anterior/posterior and inferior/superior) and the other exclusively for the torso (e.g., dorsal/ventral and caudal/rostral, or \"toward the tail\"/\"toward the beak\"), doing so would require the renaming of many anatomical structures.\n\nIn organisms with a changeable shape, such as amoeboid organisms, most directional terms are meaningless, since the shape of the organism is not constant and no distinct axes are fixed. Similarly, in spherically symmetrical organisms, there is nothing to distinguish one line through the centre of the organism from any other. An indefinite number of triads of mutually perpendicular axes could be defined, but any such choice of axes would be useless, as nothing would distinguish a chosen triad from any others. In such organisms, only terms such as \"superficial\" and \"deep\", or sometimes \"proximal\" and \"distal\", are usefully descriptive.\nIn organisms that maintain a constant shape and have one dimension longer than the other, at least two directional terms can be used. The \"long\" or \"longitudinal axis\" is defined by points at the opposite ends of the organism. Similarly, a perpendicular \"transverse axis\" can be defined by points on opposite sides of the organism. There is typically no basis for the definition of a third axis. Usually such organisms are planktonic (free-swimming) protists, and are nearly always viewed on microscope slides, where they appear essentially two-dimensional. In some cases a third axis can be defined, particularly where a non-terminal cytostome or other unique structure is present.\n\nSome elongated protists have distinctive ends of the body. In such organisms, the end with a mouth (or equivalent structure, such as the cytostome in \"Paramecium\" or \"Stentor\"), or the end that usually points in the direction of the organism's locomotion (such as the end with the flagellum in \"Euglena\"), is normally designated as the anterior end. The opposite end then becomes the posterior end. Properly, this terminology would apply only to an organism that is always planktonic (not normally attached to a surface), although the term can also be applied to one that is sessile (normally attached to a surface).\n\nOrganisms that are attached to a substrate, such as sponges, or some animal-like protists also have distinctive ends. The part of the organism attached to the substrate is usually referred to as the basal end (, \"support/foundation\"), whereas the end furthest from the attachment is referred to as the apical end (, \"peak/tip\").\n\nRadially symmetrical organisms include those in the group Radiata primarily jellyfish, sea anemones and corals and the comb jellies. Adult echinoderms, such as starfish, sea urchins, sea cucumbers and others are also included, since they are pentaradial, meaning they have five discrete rotational symmetry. Echinoderm larvae are not included, since they are bilaterally symmetrical. Radially symmetrical organisms always have one distinctive axis.\n\nCnidarians (jellyfish, sea anemones and corals) have an incomplete digestive system, meaning that one end of the organism has a mouth, and the opposite end has no opening from the gut (coelenteron). For this reason, the end of the organism with the mouth is referred to as the oral end (, \"mouth\"), and the opposite surface is the aboral end (, prefix meaning \"away from\").\n\nUnlike vertebrates, cnidarians have no other distinctive axes. \"Lateral\", \"dorsal\", and \"ventral\" have no meaning in such organisms, and all can be replaced by the generic term peripheral (, \"around\"). Medial can be used, but in the case of radiates indicates the central point, rather than a central axis as in vertebrates. Thus, there are multiple possible radial axes and medio-peripheral (half-) axes. However, it is noteworthy that some biradially symmetrical comb jellies do have distinct \"tentacular\" and \"pharyngeal\" axes and are thus anatomically equivalent to bilaterally symmetrical animals.\n\nAs with vertebrates, appendages that move independently of the body (tentacles in cnidarians and comb jellies), have a definite \"proximodistal axis\" (Fig. 9).\n\nTwo specialized terms are useful in describing views of arachnid legs and pedipalps. Prolateral refers to the surface of a leg that is closest to the anterior end of an arachnid's body. Retrolateral refers to the surface of a leg that is closest to the posterior end of an arachnid's body.\n\nBecause of the unusual nature and positions of the eyes of the Araneae (spiders), and their importance in taxonomy, evolution and anatomy, special terminology with associated abbreviations has become established in arachnology. Araneae normally have eight eyes in four pairs. All the eyes are on the carapace of the prosoma, and their sizes, shapes and locations are characteristic of various spider families and other taxa. In some taxa not all four pairs of eyes are present, the relevant species having only three, two, or one pair of eyes. Some species (mainly troglobites) have no functional eyes at all.\n\nIn what is seen as the likeliest ancestral arrangement of the eyes of the Araneae, there are two roughly parallel, horizontal, symmetrical, transverse rows of eyes, each containing two symmetrically placed pairs, respectively called: anterior and posterior lateral eyes (ALE) and (PLE); and anterior and posterior median eyes (AME) and (PME).\n\nAs a rule it is not difficult to guess which eyes are which in a living or preserved specimen, but sometimes it can be. Apart from the fact that in some species one or more pairs may be missing, sometimes eyes from the posterior and anterior rows may be very close to each other, or even fused. Also, either one row or both might be so grossly curved that some of the notionally anterior eyes actually may lie posterior to some of the eyes in the posterior row. In some species the curve is so gross that the eyes apparently are arranged into two anteroposterior parallel rows of eyes.\n\n\n", "id": "168041", "title": "Anatomical terms of location"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=220090", "text": "Index of anatomy articles\n\nArticles related to anatomy include:\n\n", "id": "220090", "title": "Index of anatomy articles"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42591787", "text": "Axial line (dermatomes)\n\nAn axial line is the line between two adjacent dermatomes that are not represented by immediately adjacent spinal levels. Although dermatomes are shown to be discrete segments on dermatomal maps (like in the image opposite), they are in fact not; adjacent dermatomes overlap with one another. This is one of the reasons for the variety of different dermatomal maps proposed. However, at axial lines, adjacent dermatomes do not overlap. An example of an axial line would be the line between the S2 and L4 dermatomes on the calf.\n", "id": "42591787", "title": "Axial line (dermatomes)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43637988", "text": "Lines of non-extension\n\nIn the field of biomechanics, the lines of non-extension are notional lines running across the human body along which body movement causes neither stretching or contraction. Discovered by Arthur Iberall in work beginning in the 1940s, as part of research into space suit design, they have been further developed by Dava Newman in the development of the Space Activity Suit.\n\nThey were originally mapped by Iberall by drawing a series of circles over a portion of the body and then watching their deformations as the wearer walked around or performed various tasks. The circles deform into ellipses as the skin stretches over the moving musculature, and these deformations were recorded. After a huge number of such measurements the data is then examined to find all of the possible deformations of the circles, and more importantly, the non-moving points on them where the original circle and the deformed ellipse intersect (at four points per circle). By mapping these points over the entire body, a series of lines are produced.\n\nThese lines may then be used to direct the placement of tension elements in a mechanical counterpressure spacesuit such as the Space Activity Suit, to enable constant suit pressure regardless of the motion of the body.\n", "id": "43637988", "title": "Lines of non-extension"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44825470", "text": "Pancreaticobiliary maljunction\n\nPancreaticobiliary maljunction is a congenital malformation, in which the pancreatic and bile ducts join anatomically outside the duodenal wall, forming a markedly long common channel. This anomaly prevents normal control by the sphincter of Oddi located in the duodenal wall, allowing regurgitation of pancreatic juices into the biliary tract and possibly leading to a higher probability of pancreaticobiliary cancers.\n", "id": "44825470", "title": "Pancreaticobiliary maljunction"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4080909", "text": "Air sacs\n\nAir sacs are spaces within an organism where there is the constant presence of air. Among modern animals, birds possess the most air sacs (9–11), with their extinct dinosaurian relatives showing a great increase in the pneumatization (presence of air) in their bones. Theropods, like \"Aerosteon\", have many air sacs in the body that are not just in bones, and they can be identified as the more primitive form of modern bird airways. Sauropods are well known for the amount of air pockets in their bones (especially vertebra), although one theropod, \"Deinocheirus\", shows a rivalling amount of air pockets.\n\nFrom about 1870 onwards scientists have generally agreed that the post-cranial skeletons of many dinosaurs contained many air-filled cavities (postcranial skeletal pneumaticity, especially in the vertebrae. Pneumatization of the skull (such as paranasal sinuses) is found in both synapsids and archosaurs, but postcranial pneumatization is found only in birds, non-avian saurischian dinosaurs, and pterosaurs.\n\nFor a long time these cavities were regarded simply as weight-saving devices, but Bakker proposed that they were connected to air sacs like those that make birds' respiratory systems the most efficient of all animals'.\n\nJohn Ruben \"et al.\" (1997, 1999, 2003, 2004) disputed this and suggested that dinosaurs had a \"tidal\" respiratory system (in and out) powered by a crocodile-like hepatic piston mechanism – muscles attached mainly to the pubis pull the liver backwards, which makes the lungs expand to inhale; when these muscles relax, the lungs return to their previous size and shape, and the animal exhales. They also presented this as a reason for doubting that birds descended from dinosaurs.\n\nCritics have claimed that, without avian air sacs, modest improvements in a few aspects of a modern reptile's circulatory and respiratory systems would enable the reptile to achieve 50% to 70% of the oxygen flow of a mammal of similar size, and that lack of avian air sacs would not prevent the development of endothermy. Very few formal rebuttals have been published in scientific journals of Ruben \"et al.\"’s claim that dinosaurs could not have had avian-style air sacs; but one points out that the \"Sinosauropteryx\" fossil on which they based much of their argument was severely flattened and therefore it was impossible to tell whether the liver was the right shape to act as part of a hepatic piston mechanism. Some recent papers simply note without further comment that Ruben \"et al.\" argued against the presence of air sacs in dinosaurs.\n\nResearchers have presented evidence and arguments for air sacs in sauropods, \"prosauropods\", coelurosaurs, ceratosaurs, and the theropods \"Aerosteon\" and \"Coelophysis\".\n\nIn advanced sauropods (\"neosauropods\") the vertebrae of the lower back and hip regions show signs of air sacs. In early sauropods only the cervical (neck) vertebrae show these features. If the developmental sequence found in bird embryos is a guide, air sacs actually evolved before the channels in the skeleton that accommodate them in later forms.\n\nEvidence of air sacs has also been found in theropods. Studies indicate that fossils of coelurosaurs, ceratosaurs, and the theropods \"Coelophysis\" and \"Aerosteon\" exhibit evidence of air sacs. \"Coelophysis\", from the late Triassic, is one of the earliest dinosaurs whose fossils show evidence of channels for air sacs. \"Aerosteon\", a Late Cretaceous allosaur, had the most bird-like air sacs found so far.\n\nEarly sauropodomorphs, including the group traditionally called \"prosauropods\", may also have had air sacs. Although possible pneumatic indentations have been found in \"Plateosaurus\" and \"Thecodontosaurus\", the indentations are very small. One study in 2007 concluded that prosauropods likely had abdominal and cervical air sacs, based on the evidence for them in sister taxa (theropods and sauropods). The study concluded that it was impossible to determine whether prosauropods had a bird-like flow-through lung, but that the air sacs were almost certainly present. A further indication for the presence of air sacs and their use in lung ventilation comes from a reconstruction of the air exchange volume (the volume of air exchanged with each breath) of \"Plateosaurus\", which when expressed as a ratio of air volume per body weight at 29 ml/kg is similar to values of geese and other birds, and much higher than typical mammalian values.\n\nSo far no evidence of air sacs has been found in ornithischian dinosaurs. But this does not imply that ornithischians could not have had metabolic rates comparable to those of mammals, since mammals also do not have air sacs.\n\nThree explanations have been suggested for the development of air sacs in dinosaurs:\n\nCalculations of the volumes of various parts of the sauropod \"Apatosaurus\"’ respiratory system support the evidence of bird-like air sacs in sauropods:\nOn this basis, \"Apatosaurus\" could not have had a reptilian respiratory system, as its tidal volume would have been less than its dead-space volume, so that stale air was not expelled but was sucked back into the lungs. Likewise, a mammalian system would only provide to the lungs about 225 − 184 = 41 liters of fresh, oxygenated air on each breath. \"Apatosaurus\" must therefore have had either a system unknown in the modern world or one like birds', with multiple air sacs and a flow-through lung. Furthermore, an avian system would only need a lung volume of about 600 liters while a mammalian one would have required about 2,950 liters, which would exceed the estimated 1,700 liters of space available in a 30-ton \"Apatosaurus\"′ chest.\n\nDinosaur respiratory systems with bird-like air sacs may have been capable of sustaining higher activity levels than mammals of similar size and build can sustain. In addition to providing a very efficient supply of oxygen, the rapid airflow would have been an effective cooling mechanism, which is essential for animals that are active but too large to get rid of all the excess heat through their skins.\n\nThe palaeontologist Peter Ward has argued that the evolution of the air sac system, which first appears in the very earliest dinosaurs, may have been in response to the very low (11%) atmospheric oxygen of the Carnian and Norian ages of the Triassic Period.\n", "id": "4080909", "title": "Air sacs"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18011422", "text": "Telecanthus\n\nTelecanthus (from the Greek word \"tele\" (τῆλε) meaning far, and the Latin word canthus, meaning either corner of the eye, where the eyelids meet) refers to increased distance between the medial canthi of the eyes, while the inter-pupillary distance is normal. This is in contrast to hypertelorism, where the inter-pupillary distance is increased.\n\nThe distance between the inner corner of the left eye and the inner corner of the right eye, is called intercanthal distance. In most people, the intercanthal distance is equal to the distance between the inner corner and the outer corner of each eye, that is, the width of the eye. The average interpupillary distance is 60–62 millimeters (mm), which corresponds to an intercanthal distance of approximately 30–31 mm. The situation, where intercanthal distance is intensely bigger than the width of the eye, is called telecanthus (tele= Greek τηλε = far, and Greek ακανθα = thorn). This can be an ethnic index or an indication for hypertelorism or hypotelorism, if it is combined with abnormal relation to the interpupillary distance (A D STEAS).\n\n\"Traumatic Telecanthus\" refers to telcanthus resulting from traumatic injury to the nasal-orbital-ethmoid (NOE) complex. The diagnosis of traumatic telecanthus requires a measurement in excess of those normative values. The pathology can be either unilateral or bilateral, with the former more difficult to measure.\n\nTelecanthus is often associated with many congenital disorders. Congenital disorders such as Down syndrome, fetal alcohol syndrome, Cri du Chat syndrome, Klinefelter syndrome, Turner syndrome, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, Waardenburg syndrome often present with prominent epicanthal fold and if these folds are nasal (most commonly are) they will cause telecanthus.\n\nFig of the used terms\n", "id": "18011422", "title": "Telecanthus"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19477293", "text": "Biology of depression\n\nScientific studies have found that numerous brain areas show altered activity in patients suffering from depression, and this has encouraged advocates of various theories that seek to identify a biochemical origin of the disease, as opposed to theories that emphasize psychological or situational causes. Several theories concerning the biologically based cause of depression have been suggested over the years, including theories revolving around monoamine neurotransmitters, neuroplasticity, inflammation and the circadian rhythm.\n\nGenetic factors involved in depression have been difficult to identify. In 2003 \"Science\" published an influential study of Avshalom Caspi et al. who found that a gene-environment interaction (GxE) may explain why life stress is a predictor for depressive episodes in some individuals, but not in others, depending on an allelic variation of the serotonin-transporter-linked promoter region (5-HTTLPR). Soon after, the results were replicated by Kenneth Kendler's group, raising hopes in the psychiatric genetics community. By 2007 there were 11 replications, 3 partial replication and 3 non-replications of this proposed GxE. However, two of the largest studies were negative. Two 2009 meta-analyses were also negative; one included 14 studies, and the other five, owing to different study selection criteria. A 2010 review found 17 replications, 8 partial replications (interaction only in females or only with one of several types of adversity), and 9 non-replications (no interaction or an interaction in the opposite direction). It also found that all studies using objective indicators or structured interviews to assess stress replicated the gene–environment interaction fully or partially, whereas all non-replications relied on self-reported measures of adversity. This review also argued that both 2009 meta-analyses were significantly biased toward negative studies.\n\nBDNF polymorphisms have also been hypothesized to have a genetic influence, but replication results have been mixed and, as of 2005, were insufficient for a meta-analysis. Studies also indicate an association of decreased BDNF production with suicidal behavior. However, findings from gene-environment interactions studies suggest that the current BDNF models of depression are too simplistic. A 2008 study found interactions (biological epistasis) in the signaling pathways of the BDNF and the serotonin transporter; the BDNF Val66Met allele, which was predicted to have reduced responsitivity to serotonin, was found to exercise protective effects in individuals with the short 5-HTTLPR allele that is otherwise believed to predispose individuals to depressive episodes after stressful events. Thus, the BDNF-mediated signalling involved in neuroplastic responses to stress and antidepressants is influenced by other genetic and environmental modifiers.\n\nThe largest genome-wide study to date failed to identify variants with genome-wide significance in over 9000 cases.\n\nRecently, a genetics study positively identified two variants with genome-wide association with major depressive disorder (MDD). This study, conducted in Chinese Han women, identified two variants in intronic regions near SIRT1 and LHPP.\n\nAttempts to find a correlation between norepinephrine transporter polymorphisms and depression have yielded negative results.\n\nOne review identified multiple frequently studied candidate genes. The 5-HTT SLC6A4 and 5-HTR2A gene's yielded inconsistent results, however they may predict treatment results. Mixed results were found for BDNF Val66Met polymorphisms. Polymorphisms in tryptophan hydroxylase genes were found to be associated with suicidal behavior. A meta analysis of 182 case controlled genetic studies published in 2008 found Apolipoprotein verepsilon 2 to be protective, and found GNB3 825T, MTHFR 677T, SLC6A4 44bp insertion or deletions, and SLC6A3 40 bpVNTR 9/10 genotype conferred risk.\n\n Depression may be related to abnormalities in the circadian rhythm, or biological clock. For example, rapid eye movement (REM) sleep—the stage in which dreaming occurs—may be quick to arrive and intense in depressed people. REM sleep depends on decreased serotonin levels in the brain stem, and is impaired by compounds, such as antidepressants, that increase serotonergic tone in brain stem structures. Overall, the serotonergic system is least active during sleep and most active during wakefulness. Prolonged wakefulness due to sleep deprivation activates serotonergic neurons, leading to processes similar to the therapeutic effect of antidepressants, such as the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). Depressed individuals can exhibit a significant lift in mood after a night of sleep deprivation. SSRIs may directly depend on the increase of central serotonergic neurotransmission for their therapeutic effect, the same system that impacts cycles of sleep and wakefulness.\n\nResearch on the effects of light therapy on seasonal affective disorder suggests that light deprivation is related to decreased activity in the serotonergic system and to abnormalities in the sleep cycle, particularly insomnia. Exposure to light also targets the serotonergic system, providing more support for the important role this system may play in depression. Sleep deprivation and light therapy both target the same brain neurotransmitter system and brain areas as antidepressant drugs, and are now used clinically to treat depression. Light therapy, sleep deprivation and sleep time displacement (sleep phase advance therapy) are being used in combination quickly to interrupt a deep depression in hospitalized patients.\n\nIncreased and decreased sleep length appears to be a risk factor for depression. Patients with MDD sometimes show diurnal and seasonal variation of symptom severity, even in non-seasonal depression. Diurnal mood improvement was associated with activity of dorsal neural networks. Increased mean core temperature was also observed. One hypothesis proposed that depression was a result of a phase shift.\n\nDaytime light exposure correlates with decreased serotonin transporter activity, which may underlie the seasonality of some depression.\n\nMonoamines are neurotransmitters that include serotonin, dopamine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine. Many antidepressant drugs increase synaptic levels of the monoamine neurotransmitter, serotonin, but they may also enhance the levels of two other neurotransmitters, norepinephrine and dopamine. The observation of this efficacy led to the \"monoamine hypothesis of depression\", which postulates that the deficit of certain neurotransmitters is responsible for the corresponding features of depression: \"Norepinephrine may be related to alertness and energy as well as anxiety, attention, and interest in life; [lack of] serotonin to anxiety, obsessions, and compulsions; and dopamine to attention, motivation, pleasure, and reward, as well as interest in life.\" The proponents of this hypothesis recommend choosing the antidepressant with the mechanism of action impacting the most prominent symptoms. Anxious or irritable patients should be treated with SSRIs or norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors, and the ones with the loss of energy and enjoyment of life—with norepinephrine and dopamine enhancing drugs. Others have also proposed the relationship between monoamines and phenotypes such as serotonin in sleep and suicide, norepinephrine in dysphoria, fatigue, apathy, cognitive dysfunction, and dopamine in loss of motivation and psychomotor symptoms.\n\nConsistent with the monoamine hypothesis, a longitudinal study uncovered a moderating effect of the serotonin transporter (5-HTT) gene on stressful life events in predicting depression. Specifically, depression seems especially likely to follow stressful life events, but even more so for people with one or two short alleles of the 5-HTT gene. Serotonin may help to regulate other neurotransmitter systems, and decreased serotonin activity may \"permit\" these systems to act in unusual and erratic ways. Facets of depression may be emergent properties of this dysregulation.\n\nVarious abnormalities have been observed in dopaminergic systems however results have been inconsistent. Patients with MDD have an increased reward response to D-Amphetamine compared to controls, and it has been suggested that this results from hypersensitivity of dopaminergic pathways due to natural hypoactivity. Polymorphisms of the D4 and D3 receptor have been implicated in depression further suggesting a role of dopamine in MDD. Results from postmortem studies have not been consistent, but various dopamine receptor agonist show promise in treating MDD There is some evidence that there is decreased nigrostriatal activity in those with melancholic depression(psychomotor retardation). Further supporting the role of dopamine in depression is the consistent finding of decreased cerebrospinal fluid and jugular metabolites of dopamine, as well as post mortem findings of altered Dopamine receptor D3 and dopamine transporter expression. Hyperactivity of catecholamine release during stress, followed by desensitization has been proposed as a mechanism for depression.\n\nFinding indicative of decreased adrenergic activity in depression have been reported. Findings include decreased activity of tyrosine hydroxylase, decreased size of the locus coeruleus, increased alpha 2 adrenergic receptor density, and decreased alpha 1 receptor density. Furthermore, norepinephrine transporter knockout in mice models increase their tolerance to stress, implicating norepinephrine in depression.\n\nOne method used to study the role of monoamines is monoamine depletion. Depletion of tryptophan(the precursor of serotonin), tyrosine and phenylalanine(precursors to dopamine) does result in decreased mood in those with a predisposition to depression, but not healthy persons. Inhibition of dopamine and norepinephrine synthesis with alpha-methyl-para-tyrosine did not consistently result in decreased mood.\n\nAn offshoot of the monoamine hypothesis suggests that monoamine oxidase A (MAO-A), an enzyme which metabolizes monoamines, may be overly active in depressed people. This would, in turn, cause the lowered levels of monoamines. This hypothesis received support from a PET study, which found significantly elevated activity of MAO-A in the brain of some depressed people. In genetic studies, the alterations of MAO-A-related genes have not been consistently associated with depression. Contrary to the assumptions of the monoamine hypothesis, lowered but not heightened activity of MAO-A was associated with the depressive symptoms in youth. This association was observed only in maltreated youth, indicating that both biological (MAO genes) and psychological (maltreatment) factors are important in the development of depressive disorders. In addition, some evidence indicates that problems in information processing within neural networks, rather than changes in chemical balance, might underlie depression.\n\nSince the 1990s, research has uncovered multiple limitations of the monoamine hypothesis, and its inadequacy has been criticized within the psychiatric community. For one thing, serotonin system dysfunction cannot be the sole cause of depression; antidepressants usually increase synaptic serotonin very quickly, but it often takes at least two to four weeks before mood improves significantly. One possible explanation for this lag is that the neurotransmitter activity enhancement is the result of auto receptor desensitization rather which can take weeks. Intensive investigation has failed to find convincing evidence of a primary dysfunction of a specific monoamine system in patients with major depressive disorders. The antidepressants that do not act through the monoamine system, such as tianeptine and opipramol, have been known for a long time. There has also been inconsistency with regards to serum 5-HIAA levels, a metabolite of serotonin. Experiments with pharmacological agents that cause depletion of monoamines have shown that this depletion does not cause depression in healthy people. Another problem that presents is that drugs that deplete monoamines may actually have antidepressants properties. Furthermore, some have argued that depression may be marked by a hyperserotonergic state Already limited, the monoamine hypothesis has been further oversimplified when presented to the general public.\n\nAs of 2012, efforts to determine differences in neurotransmitter receptor expression or for function in the brains of people with MDD using positron emission tomography (PET) had shown inconsistent results. Using the PET imaging technology and reagents available as of 2012, it appeared that the D1 receptor may be underexpressed in the striatum of people with MDD. 5-HT1A receptor binding literature is inconsistent however it leans towards a general decrease in the mesiotemporal cortex. 5-HT2A receptor binding appears to be unregulated in depressed patients. Studies on 5-HTT binding are variable but tend towards an increase. Results with D2/D3 receptor binding studies are too inconsistent to draw any conclusions. Evidence supports increase MAO activity in depressed patients, and it may even be a trait marker(not changed by response to treatment). Muscarianic receptor binding appears to be increased in depression, and given ligand binding dynamics, suggests increased cholinergic activity.\n\nStudies of emotional processing in patients with MDD show various biases such as a tendency to rate happy faces more negatively. Functional neuroimaging has demonstrated hyperactivity of various brain regions in response to negative emotional stimuli, and hypoactivity in response to positive stimuli. Patients also showed decreased activity in the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in response to negative stimuli. Depressed people have impaired recognition of happy, angry, disgusted, fearful and surprised faces, but not of sad faces. The therapeutic lag of antidepressants has been suggested to be a result of antidepressants modifying emotional processing leading to mood changes. The observation that both acute and subchronic SSRI administration increases response to positive faces.\n\nOne proposed hypothesis for negative emotional bias comes from meta analytic findings of functional neuroimaging studies. Relative to controls, depressed patients showed hyperactivity of circuit termed \"the salience network,\" composed of the pulvinar nuclei, the insula, and the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex, as well as decreased activity in regulatory circuits composed of the striatum and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. However the authors acknowledge limitations exogenous factors such as patient medication status as well as small study sample size.\n\nA similar model termed \"the limbic cortical model\" has been proposed involving hyperactivity of ventral paralimbic regions and hypoactivity of dorsal limbic and prefrontal regions. This model and another termed \"the cortical striatal model\", consisting of abnormalities in the prefrontal cortex, orbitofrontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, caudate, putamen and globus pallidus, has been supported by more recent literature. The authors cited study bias, and lack of specificity of inclusion criteria and limiting factors.\n\nDepression is also characterized by decreased activation of the medial prefrontal cortex, ventral striatum, and in particular the nucleus accumbens in response to positive stimuli. These regions are important in reward processing, and dysfunction of them in depression is thought to underly anhedonia, a core symptom of depression involving decreased ability to feel pleasure. Residual anhedonia that is not well targeted by serotonergic antidepressants is hypothesized to result from inhibition of dopamine release by activation of 5-HT2C receptors in the striatum.\n\nResearch on the brains of depressed patients usually shows disturbed patterns of interaction between multiple parts of the brain. Several areas of the brain are implicated in studies seeking to more fully understand the biology of depression:\n\nThe sole source of serotonin in the brain is the raphe nuclei, a group of small nerve cell nuclei in the upper brain stem, located directly at the mid-line of the brain. There is some evidence for neuropathological abnormalities in the rostral raphe nuclei in depression. Despite their small size, they reach very widely through their projections, and are involved in a very diverse set of functions. Most antidepressants are serotonergic.\n\nRecent studies have shown that Brodmann area 25, also known as subgenual cingulate, is metabolically overactive in treatment-resistant depression. This region is extremely rich in serotonin transporters and is considered as a governor for a vast network involving areas like hypothalamus and brain stem, which influences changes in appetite and sleep; the amygdala and insula, which affect the mood and anxiety; the hippocampus, which plays an important role in memory formation; and some parts of the frontal cortex responsible for self-esteem. Thus disturbances in this area or a smaller than normal size of this area contributes to depression. Deep brain stimulation has been targeted to this region in order to reduce its activity in people with treatment resistant depression.\n\nMultiple studies have found evidence of ventricular enlargement in people who have depression, particularly enlargement of the third ventricle. These observations are interpreted as indicating loss of neural tissue in brain regions adjacent to the enlarged ventricle, leading to suggestions that cytokines and related mediators of neurodegeneration may play a role in giving rise to the disease.\n\nOne review reported hypoactivity in the prefrontal cortex of those with depression compared to controls. The prefrontal cortex is involved in emotional processing and regulation, and dysfunction of this process may be involved in the etiology of depression. One study on antidepressant treatment found an increase in PFC activity in response to administration of antidepressants. One meta analysis published in 2012 found that areas of the prefrontal cortex were hypoactive in response to negative stimuli in depressed patients. One study suggested that areas of the prefrontal cortex are part of a network of regions including dorsal and pregenual cingulate, bilateral middle frontal gyrus, insula and superior temporal gyrus that appear to be hypoactive in depressed patients. However the authors cautioned that the exclusion criteria, lack of consistency and small samples limit results.\n\nThe amygdala, a structure involved in emotional processing appears to be hyperactive in those with major depressive disorder. The amygdala in unmedicated depressed persons tended to be smaller than in those that were medicated, however aggregate data shows no difference between depressed and healthy persons. During emotional processing tasks right amygdala is more active than the left, however there is no differences during cognitive tasks, and at rest only the left amygdala appears to be more hyperactive. One study, however, found no difference in amygdala activity during emotional processing tasks.\n\nAtrophy of the hippocampus has been observed during depression, consistent with animal models of stress and neurogenesis.\n\nStress can cause depression and depression-like symptoms through monoaminergic changes in several key brain regions as well as suppression in hippocampal neurogenesis. This leads to alteration in emotion and cognition related brain regions as well as HPA axis dysfunction. Through the dysfunction, the effects of stress can be exacerbated including its effects on 5-HT. Furthermore, some of these effects are reversed by antidepressant action, which may act by increasing hippocampal neurogenesis. This leads to a restoration in HPA activity and stress reactivity, thus restoring the deleterious effects induced by stress on 5-HT.\nThe hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis is a chain of endocrine structures that are activated during the body's response to stressors of various sorts. The HPA axis involves three structure, the hypothalamus which release CRH that stimulates the pituitary gland to release ACTH which stimulates the adrenal glands to release cortisol. Cortisol has a negative feedback effect on the pituitary gland and hypothalamus. In depressed patients the often shows increased activation in depressed people, but the mechanism behind this is not yet known. Increased basal cortisol levels and abnormal response to dexamethasone challenges have been observed in patients with depression. Early life stress has been hypothesized as a potential cause of HPA dysfunction. HPA axis regulation may be examined through a dexamethasone suppression tests, which tests the feedback mechanisms. Non-suppression of dexamethasone is a common finding in depression, but is not consistent enough to be used as a diagnostic tool. HPA axis changes by be responsible for some of the changes such as decreased bone mineral density and increased weight found in patients with MDD. One drug, ketoconazole, currently under development has shown promise in treating MDD.\n\nRecent studies have called attention to the role of altered neuroplasticity in depression. A review found convergence of three phenomena:\n\n\nThe conclusion is that disrupted neuroplasticity is an underlying feature of depression, and is reversed by antidepressants.\n\nBlood levels of BDNF in depressed patients increase significantly with antidepressant treatment and correlate with decrease in symptoms. Post mortem studies and rat models demonstrate decreased neuronal density in the prefrontal cortex thickness in depressed patients. Rat models demonstrate histological changes consistent with MRI findings in humans, however studies on neurogenesis in humans are limited. Antidepressants appear to reverse the changes in neurogenesis in both animal models and humans.\n\nVarious review have found that general inflammation may play a role in depression. One meta analysis of cytokines in depressed patients found increased IL-6 and TNF-a levels relative to controls. First theories came about when it was noticed that interferon therapy caused depression in a large number of patients. Meta analysis on cytokine levels in depressed patients have demonstrated increased levels of IL-1, IL-6, C-reactive protein, but not IL-10 in depressed patients. Increased numbers of T-Cells presenting activation markers, levels of neopterin, IFN gamma, sTNFR, and IL-2 receptors have been observed in depression. Various sources of inflammation in depressive illness have been hypothesized and include trauma, sleep problems, diet, smoking and obesity. Cytokines, by manipulating neurotransmitters, are involved in the generation of sickness behavior, which shares some overlap with the symptoms of depression. Neurotransmitters hypothesized to be affected include dopamine and serotonin, which are common targets for antidepressant drugs. Induction of indolamine-2,3 dioxygenease by cytokines has been proposed as a mechanism by which immune dysfunction causes depression. One review found normalization of cytokine levels after successful treatment of depression.\n\nA meta analysis published in 2014 found the use of anti-inflammatory drugs such as NSAIDs and investigational cytokine inhibitors reduced depressive symptoms.\n\nIncreased markers of oxidative stress relative to controls have been found in patients with MDD. A marker of DNA oxidation, 8-Oxo-2'-deoxyguanosine, has been found to be increased in both the plasma and urine of depressed patients. This along with the finding of increased F2-isoprostanes levels found in blood, urine and cerebrospinal fluid indicate increased damage to lipids and DNA in depressed patients. Studies with 8-Oxo-2' Deoxyguanosine varied by methods of measurement and type of depression, but F2-Isoprostane level was consistent across depression types. Authors suggested lifestyle factors, dysregulation of the HPA axis, immune system and autonomics nervous system as possible causes. Another meta-analysis found similar results with regards to oxidative damage products as well as decreased oxidative capacity.\n\nOne meta analysis found decreased leukocyte telomere lengths in depressed patients.\n\nInstead of studying one brain region, studying large scale brain networks is another approach to understanding psychiatric and neurological disorders, supported by recent research that has shown that multiple brain regions are involved in these disorders. Understanding the disruptions in these networks may provide important insights into interventions for treating these disorders. Recent work suggests that at least three large-scale brain networks are important in psychopathology:\n\nThe executive network is made up of fronto-parietal regions, including dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and lateral posterior parietal cortex. This network is crucially involved in high level cognitive functions such as maintaining and using information in working memory, problem solving, and decision making. Deficiencies in this network are common in most major psychiatric and neurological disorders, including depression. Because this network is crucial for everyday life activities, those who are depressed can show impairment in basic activities like test taking and being decisive.\n\nThe default mode network includes hubs in the prefrontal cortex and posterior cingulate, with other prominent regions of the network in the medial temporal lobe and angular gyrus. The default mode network is usually active during mind-wandering and thinking about social situations. In contrast, during specific tasks probed in cognitive science (for example, simple attention tasks), the default network is often deactivated. Research has shown that regions in the default mode network (including medial prefrontal cortex and posterior cingulate) show greater activity when depressed participants ruminate (that is, when they engage in repetitive self-focused thinking) than when typical, healthy participants ruminate. Individuals suffering from major depression also show increased connectivity between the default mode network and the subgenual cingulate and the adjoining ventromedial prefrontal cortex in comparison to healthy individuals, individuals with dementia or with autism. Numerous studies suggest that the subgenual cingulate plays an important role in the dysfunction that characterizes major depression. The increased activation in the default mode network during rumination and the atypical connectivity between core default mode regions and the subgenual cingulate may underlie the tendency for depressed individual to get “stuck” in the negative, self-focused thoughts that often characterize depression. However, further research is needed to gain a precise understanding of how these network interactions map to specific symptoms of depression.\n\nThe salience network is a cingulate-frontal operculum network that includes core nodes in the anterior cingulate and anterior insula. A salience network is a large-scale brain network involved in detecting and orienting the most pertinent of the external stimuli and internal events being presented. Individuals who have a tendency to experience negative emotional states (scoring high on measures of neuroticism) show an increase in the right anterior insula during decision-making, even if the decision has already been made. This atypically high activity in the right anterior insula is thought to contribute to the experience of negative and worrisome feelings. In major depressive disorder, anxiety is often a part of the emotional state that characterizes depression.\n\n\n", "id": "19477293", "title": "Biology of depression"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49411786", "text": "Retroperitonium\n\nThe retroperitoneum or retroperitnium is an anatomical region that includes the peritoneum-covered organs and tissues that make up the posterior wall of the abdominal cavity and the pelvic space - which extends behind to the abdominal cavity. Definitions vary and can also can include the region of the wall of the pelvic basin.\n\nThe portion of the retroperitoneum that is posterior wall of the abdomen and superior to the iliac vessels is of importance in gynecological oncology. This is the region where para-aortic and paracaval lymphadenectomies are done. The lateral boundary of the retroperitoneum is defined by the ascending and descending colon. The retroperitoneum can be approached from above by moving the duodenum aside as far as the major renal blood vessels.\n", "id": "49411786", "title": "Retroperitonium"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45451785", "text": "Buccopharyngeal\n\nIn anatomy, buccopharyngeal structures are those pertaining to the cheek and the pharynx or to the mouth and the pharynx.\n\nIt may refer to:\n\n", "id": "45451785", "title": "Buccopharyngeal"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50013171", "text": "Endometrial cup\n\nEndometrial cups form during pregnancy in mares and are the source of equine chorionic gonadotropin (eCG) and a placenta-associated structure, which is derived from the fetus. Their purpose is to increase the immunological tolerance of the mare in order to protect the developing foal.\n\nEndometrial cups are unique to animals in the horse family, and so named because of their concave shape. They are a placenta-associated structure, found in the uterine wall of a mare from about 38 to 150 days into a pregnancy. After about 70 days, they begin to regress, and are eventually destroyed by the immune system. They begin to develop at approximately 25 days of pregnancy, deriving from the chorionic girdle. At approximately 36-38 days of pregnancy, the cells that will become the endometrial cup begin to burrow into the endometrial tissue, through the basement membrane, and into the uterine stroma. Their invasion of the uterine stroma begins the cells' maturation process, which takes 2-3 days. Endometrial cups can be circular, U-shaped, or ribbonlike and are pale compared to the rest of the endometrial tissue. They can range in size from 1 cm to 10 cm in diameter at the widest point. They resemble ulcers in form, and when examined under a microscope have large epithelioid decidual-like cells and large nucleoli. \n\nThey produce high concentrations of equine chorionic gonadotropin (eCG), also called pregnant mare's serum gonadotropin, in the bloodstream of pregnant mares. eCG is actually an equine luteinizing hormone. Endometrial cups behave somewhat like cells from metastatic tumors, in that they leave the placenta and migrate into the uterus. Their purpose appears to be to work with other placental cells to control the expression of histocompatibility genes so that the developing fetus is not destroyed by the mare’s immune system.\n\nSimilar types of cells that invade the placenta have been described in humans. The purpose of these cells In both humans and horses is believed to be to interact with the mother’s immune system and increase maternal immunological tolerance of the developing fetus.\n\nMature endometrial cup cells appear rounded and secrete eCG; all but a few cells have two nuclei. As the mare's immune system begins to react to the presence of the pregnancy, histological changes are visible. First, as the endometrial cup grows and develops, maternal white blood cells, including T cells, B cells, and macrophages, mass in the uterine stroma. They begin to destroy the cup around days 70-80 of pregnancy, and it is completely destroyed by 100-140 days, at which point it naturally separates from the endometrium.\n\n", "id": "50013171", "title": "Endometrial cup"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50157768", "text": "Condyle of humerus\n\nThe Condyle of humerus is the distal end of the humerus. It is made up of the capitulum and the trochlea.\n", "id": "50157768", "title": "Condyle of humerus"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50180786", "text": "Passavant’s ridge\n\nPassavant's ridge is a mucous elevation situated behind the floor of the naso-pharynx.\n\nIt is also known as Passavant's pad or palatopharyngeal ridge. The prominence of mucous tissue is formed by the contraction of superior constrictor during swallowing. Palatopharyngeal muscle originates from the upper surface of palatial Maurois pone-by anterior and posterior fascicle, which are separated by the insertion of levator veli palatini. Both fasciculi join laterally to form a single muscle that passes downward and backward under cover of the palatopharyngeal arch. In the pharynx, it joins with the salpingo pharyngeus muscles and is inserted. A few fibers of palatopharyngeus muscle sweep backward under cover of the passavant's ridge and form a U-shaped sling of palatopharyngeal sphincter.when soft palate is elevated it comes in contact with ridge, the two together closing pharyngeal isthmus between nasopharynx and oropharynx\n", "id": "50180786", "title": "Passavant’s ridge"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3469770", "text": "Molecular anatomy\n\nMolecular anatomy is the subspecialty of microscopic anatomy concerned with the identification and description of molecular structures of cells, tissues, and organs in an organism.\n", "id": "3469770", "title": "Molecular anatomy"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8299745", "text": "Lobe (anatomy)\n\nIn anatomy, a lobe is a clear anatomical division or extension of an organ (as seen for example in the brain, the lung, liver or the kidney) that can be determined without the use of a microscope at the gross anatomy level. This is in contrast to the much smaller lobule, which is a clear division only visible under the microscope.\n\nInterlobar ducts connect lobes and interlobular ducts connect lobules.\n\n\n", "id": "8299745", "title": "Lobe (anatomy)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51596724", "text": "Anatomical variability\n\nAnatomical variability is the differences between anatomical structures of the animals from the same species. This variability is mainly caused by genetical effects and it may vary considerably between different populations. Rate of variability considerably differ between single organs. Therefore, the state that occurs with biggest probability is considered as a norm. It is necessary to distinguish between pathological conditions that are not considered as an anatomical variation.\n\n\n", "id": "51596724", "title": "Anatomical variability"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52002555", "text": "Infraorbital vein\n\nThe infraorbital vein arises on the face by the union of several tributaries. Accompanied by the infraorbital artery and the infraorbital nerve, it passes posteriorly through the infraorbital foramen, infraorbital canal, and infraorbital groove. It drains through the inferior orbital fissure into the pterygoid venous plexus. It receives tributaries from structures that lie close to the floor of the orbit and communicates with the inferior ophthalmic vein.\n", "id": "52002555", "title": "Infraorbital vein"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52108518", "text": "Pennsylvania Anatomy Act of 1883\n\nThe Pennsylvania Anatomy Act of 1883 is legislation of the State of Pennsylvania to facilitate medical education. This act allowed teachers and students to be able to dissect bodies without have to resort to buying from grave robbers or buying body parts. This act was written to prevent grave robbing, and to even out the availability of corpses.\n\nPrior to the Pennsylvania Anatomy Act being passed in 1883, many other dissection acts were passed in America. These acts included the Massachusetts Act of 1784, which stated that those that died or were executed due to dueling may be dissected. The next act was an act in New York called An Act to Prevent the Odious Practice of Digging up and Removing, for the Purpose of Dissection, Dead Bodies Interred in Cemeteries or Burial Places. This act was one of the first acts in America to prevent grave robbing for dissection, the first section says that anyone convicted of removing a dead body for the purpose of dissection, intending to dissect, dissecting or assisting with the dissection shall suffer consequences. So that learning about anatomy using dissection is not harmed when someone is convicted of murder, arson, or burglary they are then either sentenced to death, and the judges may decide that the offender's body be used for dissection or their body is buried. Then in 1831 Massachusetts passed an act saying that the bodies of the unclaimed deceased be delivered to the anatomists, under certain restrictions. In 1835 Missouri allowed executed slaves along with convicted criminal's bodies to be dissected. The 1854 Bone Bill in New York allowed the unclaimed bodies of criminals or the homeless to be sent to medical schools.\n\nIn 1867 the city of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania and the county of Allegheny in Pennsylvania, passed an act, that gave each medical school, in the public and private sectors, within Philadelphia and Allegheny county Pennsylvania the same amount of unclaimed bodies per student. Therefore, a larger medical school would get more bodies than a small school of 20 students, such as if a school were to have 200 medical students they would get 50 bodies, but if a school were to have 25 medical students they would receive 12-13 bodies. If a person claimed that they wanted to be buried prior to death, then their body would not be allowed to be given to these medical schools, they would instead be buried despite being unclaimed. Another part of this act punished the anatomists if they were caught selling the spare bodies or spare body parts, the same punishment applied for the grave robbers and someone caught buying the spare bodies or spare body parts. This act later on was made into seven sections and would include all of the counties of Pennsylvania, instead of one county and a major city, and would become what we know today as the Pennsylvania Anatomy act of 1883.\n\nThe Act stated that all bodies used for medical advancements must be obtained in a legal manner, through the state, so as to prevent the unethical obtaining of corpses. The Act also allowed for the use of unclaimed bodies for medical research.\n\nSection One of the Act specified the creation of a board of scholars that would be tasked with the delivery of corpses. This board of scholars would be made up of no less than 25 scholars elected by each of the dentistry, surgery, and medical schools within the Pennsylvania Commonwealth. The board would be tasked with the record keeping of each corpse delivered, and who the corpse was delivered to.\n\nSpecifications for the distribution of corpses were put into place by Section Three of the Act. Bodies would first be delivered to schools in need of bodies for demonstrations and lectures. Bodies remaining after the initial need was met were to be allotted based on the number of students in each class.\n\nSection Five of the bill stated that the distribution of corpses illegally over Commonwealth boundaries would be considered body trafficking. It was further specified that such trafficking would be charged as a misdemeanor offense, resulting in up to a 200 dollar fine or a one-year sentence in prison.\n\nMembers of the board who do not perform their duties as required will be subject to up to a 500 dollar fine, as specified by Section Seven of the Act.\n\nThe initial Act was accepted by the House of Representatives, but opposed in the senate by one senator who claimed that the Act was, \"unworthy of the age in which [they] live\". This opposition caused the Act to be rewritten and re-submitted for consideration. The act was then rewritten, and it was passed in both the House and Senate in the year 1883.\n\nHarris, D. Fraser. \"History of the Events Which Led to the Passing of the British Anatomy Act, A.D. 1832.\" Canadian Medical Association Journal 10.3 (1920): 283-84. NCBI. Web. 24 Oct. 2016. <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1523813/?page=1>.\n\nForbes, W. S. History of the Anatomy Act of Pennsylvania. Philadelphia: The Philadelphia Medical Publishing Company, 1898. PDF. <http://jdc.jefferson.edu/anatomy_act_of_penn/1/>.\n\nScovil, Lindsay. \"A Market for Death.\" A-market-for-death. Lindsay Scovil, 2015. Web. 23 Oct. 2016. <http://www.marketfordeath.com/timelineofanatomyacts>.\n\n\"Passage of an Anatomy Act in Pennsylvania.: An Act for the Promotion of Medical Science, and to Prevent the Traffic in Human Bodies.\" Chicago Medical Examiner (1860-1871) 8.5 (1867): 300-02.American Periodicals Series Online [ProQuest]. Web. 24 Oct. 2016.\n", "id": "52108518", "title": "Pennsylvania Anatomy Act of 1883"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52815813", "text": "General sense (anatomy)\n\nIn medicine and anatomy, the general senses are the senses which are perceived due to receptors scattered throughout the body such as touch, temperature, and hunger, rather than tied to a specific structure, as the special senses vision or hearing are. Often, the general senses are associated with a specific drive; that is, the sensation will cause a change in behavior meant to reduce the sensation.\n", "id": "52815813", "title": "General sense (anatomy)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52005845", "text": "Petrolingual ligament\n\nThe petrolingual ligament lies at the posteroinferior aspect of the lateral wall of the cavernous sinus and marks the point at which the internal carotid artery enters the cavernous sinus.\n\nAnatomically, the petrolingual ligament demarcates two of the segments of the internal carotid artery: \n\nFor surgeons and radiologists, it is important to be oriented to the location of this ligament in cases of possible dissection of the internal carotid artery, as it helps determine whether the dissection has occurred inside or outside the cavernous sinus.\n", "id": "52005845", "title": "Petrolingual ligament"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=149769", "text": "Excretory system\n\nThe excretory system is a passive biological system that removes excess, unnecessary materials from the body fluids of an organism, so as to help maintain internal chemical homeostasis and prevent damage to the body. The dual function of excretory systems is the elimination of the waste products of metabolism and to drain the body of used up and broken down components in a liquid and gaseous state. In humans and other amniotes (mammals, birds and reptiles) most of these substances leave the body as urine and to some degree exhalation, mammals also expel them through sweating.\n\nOnly the organs specifically used for the excretion are considered a part of the excretory system. In the narrow sense, the term refer to the urinary system. However, as excretion involves several functions that are only superficially related, it is not usually used in more formal classifications of anatomy or function.\n\nAs most healthy functioning organs produce metabolic and other wastes, the entire organism depends on the function of the system. Breaking down of one of more of the systems is a serious health condition, for example renal failure.\n\nThe kidneys are bean-shaped organs which are present on each side of the vertebral column in the abdominal cavity. Humans have two kidneys and each kidney is supplied with blood from the renal artery. The kidneys remove from the blood the nitrogenous wastes such as urea, as well as salts and excess water, and excrete them in the form of urine. This is done with the help of millions of nephrons present in the kidney. The filtrated blood is carried away from the kidneys by the renal vein (or kidney vein). The urine from the kidney is collected by the ureter (or excretory tubes), one from each kidney, and is passed to the urinary bladder. The urinary bladder collects and stores the urine until urination. The urine collected in the bladder is passed into the external environment from the body through an opening called the urethra.\n\nThe kidney's primary function is the elimination of waste from the bloodstream by production of urine. They perform several homeostatic functions such as:-\n\n\nThe way the kidneys do this is with nephrons. There are over 1 million nephrons in each kidney; these nephrons act as filters inside the kidneys. The kidneys filter needed materials and waste, the needed materials go back into the bloodstream, and unneeded materials becomes urine and is gotten rid of.\n\nIn some cases, excess wastes crystallize as kidney stones. They grow and can become painful irritants that may require surgery or ultrasound treatments. Some stones are small enough to be forced into the urethra.\n\nThe ureters are muscular ducts that propel urine from the kidneys to the urinary bladder. In the human adult, the ureters are usually 25–30 cm (10–12 in) long. In humans, the ureters arise from the renal pelvis on the medial aspect of each kidney before descending towards the bladder on the front of the psoas major muscle. The ureters cross the pelvic brim near the bifurcation of the iliac arteries (which they run over). This \"pelviureteric junction\" is a common site for the impaction of kidney stones (the other being the uteterovesical valve). The ureters run posteriorly on the lateral walls of the pelvis. They then curve anteriormedially to enter the bladder through the back, at the vesicoureteric junction, running within the wall of the bladder for a few centimeters. The backflow of urine is prevented by valves known as ureterovesical valves. In the female, the ureters pass through the mesometrium on the way to the bladder.\n\nThe urinary bladder is the organ that collects waste excreted by the kidneys prior to disposal by urination. It is a hollow muscular, and distensible (or elastic) organ, and sits on the pelvic floor. Urine enters the bladder via the ureters and exits via the urethra.\n\nEmbryologically, the bladder is derived from the urogenital sinus, and it is initially continuous with the allantois. In human males, the base of the bladder lies between the rectum and the pubic symphysis. It is superior to the prostate, and separated from the rectum by the rectovesical excavation. In females, the bladder sits inferior to the uterus and anterior to the vagina. It is separated from the uterus by the vesicouterine excavation. In infants and young children, the urinary bladder is in the abdomen even when empty.\n\nIn anatomy, the (from Greek – ourethra) is a tube which connects the urinary bladder to the outside of the body. In humans, the urethra has an excretory function in both genders to pass.\n\nOne of the main functions of the lungs is to diffuse gaseous wastes, such as carbon dioxide, from the bloodstream as a normal part of respiration.\n\nThe large intestine's main function is to transport food particles through the body and expel the indigestible parts at the other end, but it also collects waste from throughout the body. The typical brown colour of mammal waste is due to bilirubin, a breakdown product of normal heme catabolism. The lower part of the large intestine also extracts any remaining usable water and then removes solid waste. At about 10 feet long in humans, it transports the wastes through the tubes to be excreted.\n\nThe liver detoxifies and breaks down chemicals, poisons and other toxins that enter the body. For example, the liver transforms ammonia (which is poisonous) into urea in fish, amphibians and mammals, and into uric acid in birds and reptiles. Urea is filtered by the kidney into urine or through the gills in fish and tadpoles. Uric acid is paste-like and expelled as a semi-solid waste (the \"white\" in bird excrements). The liver also produces bile, and the body uses bile to break down fats into usable fats and unusable waste.\n\nInvertebrates lack a liver, but most terrestrial groups, like insects, possesses a number of blind guts that serve the similar functions. Marine invertebrates do not need the ammonia conversion of the liver, as they can usually expel ammonia directly by diffusion through the skin.\n\nSweat glands in the skin secrete a fluid waste called sweat or perspiration; however, its primary functions are temperature control and pheromone release. Therefore, its role as a part of the excretory system is minimal. Sweating also maintains the level of salt in the body.\n\nIn mammals. the skin excretes sweat through sweat glands throughout the body. The sweat, helped by salt, evaporates and helps to keep the body cool when it is warm. In amphibians, the lungs are very simple, and they lack the necessary means to the exhale like other tetrapods can. The moist, scale-less skin is therefore essential in helping to rid the blood of carbon dioxide, and also allows for urea to be expelled through diffusion when submerged.\n\nIn small-bodied marine invertebrates, the skin is the most important excretory organ. That is particularly true for acoelomate groups like cnidarians, flatworms and nemerteans, who have no body cavities and hence no body fluid that can be drained or purified by nephrons, which is the reason acoelomate animals are thread-like (nemertans), flat (flatworms) or only consist of a thin layer of cells around a gelatinous non-cellular interior (cnidarians).\n\nLike sweat glands, eccrine glands allow excess water to leave the body. The majority of eccrine glands are located mainly on the forehead, the bottoms of the feet, and the palms, although the glands are everywhere throughout the body. They help the body to maintain temperature control. Eccrine glands in the skin are unique to mammals.\n\nSecretions of sweat from the eccrine glands play a large role in controlling the body temperature of humans. Regulation of body temperature, also known as thermoregulation, is very important when it comes to instances that bring the body’s temperature outside of the homeostatic temperature such as with a fever or even exercise. Together these glands make up the size of about one kidney and in one day a human can perspire amounts as much as 10 liters. The two functions consist of secretion of a filtrate in response to acetylcholine and reabsorption of sodium near the duct when there is water in excess so that a sweat can be surfacing the skin.\n\nThere are three parts to the eccrine sweat gland and these are the pore, the duct, and the gland. The pore is the portion that goes through the outermost layer of the skin and is typically 5-10 microns in diameter. The duct is the part of the sweat gland that connects dermis cells to the epidermis. It is composed by two layers of cells and is between 10 and 20 microns in diameter. The gland does the actual secretion and it lies deep within the dermis. The cells that make up the gland are larger in size than the duct cells and its lumen is around 20 microns in diameter.\n\nAfter bile is produced in the liver, it is stored in the gall bladder. It is then secreted within the small intestine where it helps to emulsify fats in the same manner as a soap. Bile also contains bilirubin, which is a waste product.\n\nBile salts can be considered waste that is useful for the body given that they have a role in fat absorption from the stomach. They are excreted from the liver and along with blood flow they help to form the shape of the liver where they are excreted. For instance, if biliary drainage is impaired than that part of the liver will end up wasting away.\n\nBiliary obstruction is typically due to masses blocking the ducts of the system such as tumors. The consequences of this depend on the site of blockage and how long it goes on for. There is inflammation of the ducts due to the irritation from the bile acids and this can cause infections. If rupture of the duct takes place it is very traumatic and even fatal.\n\nWithin the kidney, blood first passes through the afferent artery to the capillary formation called a glomerulus and is collected in the Bowman's capsule, which filters the blood from its contents—primarily food and wastes. After the filtration process, the blood then returns to collect the food nutrients it needs, while the wastes pass into the collecting duct, to the renal pelvis, and to the ureter, and are then secreted out of the body via the urinary bladder.\n\nScientifically, masses referred to as a renal calculus or nephrolith, or more commonly, “kidney stones,” are solid masses of crystals that may be a variety of shapes, sizes, and textures, that can reside within one or both of the kidneys. Kidney stones form when the balance is off between the concentration of substances that pass through urine, and the substances that are supposed to dissolve them. When substances are not properly dissolved, they have the ability to build up, and form these kidney stones. These stones are most commonly made up of substances such as calcium, cystine, oxalate, and uric acid, as these are the substances that normally would dissolve within the urine. When they do not dissolve correctly and further build up, they will commonly lodge themselves in the urinary tract and in this case, are usually small enough to pass through urine. In extreme situations, however, these stones may lodge themselves within the tube that connects the kidney and the bladder, called the ureter. In this case, they become very large in size and will most likely cause great pain, bleeding, and possibly even block the flow of urine. These can occur in both men and women, and studies show that around 12% of men, and 8% of women in America will develop kidney stones within their lifetime.\n\nIn those extreme situations, in which kidney stones are too large to pass on their own, patients may seek removal. Most of these treatments involving kidney stone removal are done by a urologist; a physician who specializes in the organs of the Urinary system. A common way of removal is shock wave lithotripsy, in which the urologist will shock the kidney stone into smaller pieces via laser, allowing these pieces to further pass through the urine on their own, as a normal case of kidney stones. Larger, more serious cases may demand Cystoscopy, Ureteroscopy, or Percutaneous Nephrolithotomy, in which the doctor will use a viewing tool or camera to locate the stone, and based on the size or situation, may either chose to continue with surgical removal, or use the shock wave lithotripsy treatment. Once the kidney stone(s) are successfully eliminated, the urologist will commonly suggest medication to prevent future recurrences.\n\nPyelonephritis is a type of urinary tract infection that occurs when bacteria enters the body through the urinary tract. It causes an inflammation of the renal parenchyma, calyces, and pelvis. There are three main classifications of pyelonephritis: acute, chronic and xanthogranulomatous.\n\nIn acute pyelonephritis, the patient experiences high fever, abdominal pain and pain while passing urine. Treatment for acute pyelonephritis is provided via antibiotics and an extensive urological investigation is conducted to find any abnormalities and prevent recurrence.\n\nIn chronic pyelonephritis, patients experience persistent abdominal and flank pain, high fever, decreased appetite, weight loss, urinary tract symptoms and blood in the urine. Chronic pyelonephritis can also lead to scarring of the renal parenchyma caused by recurrent kidney infections.\n\nXanthogranulomatous pyelonephritis is an unusual form of chronic pyelonephritis. It results in severe destruction of the kidney and causes granulomatous abscess formation. Patients infected with Xanthogranulomatous pyelonephritis experience recurrent fevers, anemia, kidney stones and loss of function in the affected kidney.\n\nA urine culture and antibiotics sensitivity test is issued for patients who are believed to have pyelonephritis. Since most cases of pyelonephritis are caused from bacterial infections, antibiotics are a common treatment option. Depending on the species of the infecting organism and the antibiotics sensitivity profile of the organism, treatments may include fluoroquinolones, cephalosporins, aminoglycosides, or trimethoprim individually or in combination. For patients with xanthogranulomatous pyelonephritis, treatment might include antibiotics as well as surgery. Nephrectomy is the most common surgical treatment for a majority of cases invloving xanthogranulomatous pyelonephritis.\n\nIn men, roughly 2-3 cases per 10,000 are treated as outpatients and 1 in 10,000 cases require admission to the hospital. In women, approximately 12-13 in 10,000 cases are treated as outpatients and 3-4 cases are admitted to a hospital. The most common age group affected by Xanthogranulomatous pyelonephritis is middle-aged women. Infants and elderly are also at an increased risk because of hormonal and anatomical changes.\n\n", "id": "149769", "title": "Excretory system"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53869659", "text": "Injection of vinylite and corrosion\n\nInjection of vinylite and corrosion is an anatomical technique used to visualize branching and pathways of the circulatory system. It consists of filling the circulatory system of the piece with vinyl acetate and its use of corrosion technique for the removal of the superposed matter, that is, the organic matter. The technique of vinylite followed by corrosion, besides having low cost, provides a long period of conservation, satisfying the need of undergraduate students as the study of anatomy.\n\nThe technique of filling by vinilite is considered an angiotechnical, which consists of the study of blood vessels. This is used to mark the circulatory system (arterial and venous) with the use of pre-pigmented vinyl acetate to fill the vessels of the part to be studied in order to be able to visualize the ducts and duly filled systems. For corrosion or semi-corrosion, hydrochloric acid is the most viable substance used to obtain templates for the vascularization of organs or parts.\n", "id": "53869659", "title": "Injection of vinylite and corrosion"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11492", "text": "Foot\n\nThe foot (plural feet) is an anatomical structure found in many vertebrates. It is the terminal portion of a limb which bears weight and allows locomotion. In many animals with feet, the foot is a separate organ at the terminal part of the leg made up of one or more segments or bones, generally including claws or nails.\n\nThe word \"foot\", in the sense of meaning the \"terminal part of the leg of a vertebrate animal\" comes from \"Old English fot \"foot,\" from Proto-Germanic *fot (source also of Old Frisian fot, Old Saxon fot, Old Norse fotr, Danish fod, Swedish fot, Dutch voet, Old High German fuoz, German Fuß, Gothic fotus \"foot\"), from PIE root *ped- \"foot.\" \nThe \"[p]lural form feet is an instance of i-mutation.\" \n\nThe human foot is a strong and complex mechanical structure containing 26 bones, 33 joints (20 of which are actively articulated), and more than a hundred muscles, tendons, and ligaments. The joints of the foot are the ankle and subtalar joint and the interphalangeal articulations of the foot. An anthropometric study of 1197 North American adult Caucasian males (mean age 35.5 years) found that a man's foot length was 26.3 cm with a standard deviation of 1.2 cm.\n\nThe foot can be subdivided into the hindfoot, the midfoot, and the forefoot:\n\nThe \"hindfoot\" is composed of the talus (or ankle bone) and the calcaneus (or heel bone). The two long bones of the lower leg, the tibia and fibula, are connected to the top of the talus to form the ankle. Connected to the talus at the subtalar joint, the calcaneus, the largest bone of the foot, is cushioned underneath by a layer of fat.\n\nThe five irregular bones of the \"midfoot\", the cuboid, navicular, and three cuneiform bones, form the arches of the foot which serves as a shock absorber. The midfoot is connected to the hind- and fore-foot by muscles and the plantar fascia.\n\nThe \"forefoot\" is composed of five toes and the corresponding five proximal long bones forming the metatarsus. Similar to the fingers of the hand, the bones of the toes are called phalanges and the big toe has two phalanges while the other four toes have three phalanges each. The joints between the phalanges are called interphalangeal and those between the metatarsus and phalanges are called metatarsophalangeal (MTP).\nBoth the midfoot and forefoot constitute the \"dorsum\" (the area facing upwards while standing) and the \"planum\" (the area facing downwards while standing).\n\nThe \"instep\" is the arched part of the foot between the toes and the ankle.\n\n\nThere can be many sesamoid bones near the metatarsophalangeal joints, although they are only regularly present in the distal portion of the first metatarsal bone.\n\nThe human foot has two longitudinal arches and a transverse arch maintained by the interlocking shapes of the foot bones, strong ligaments, and pulling muscles during activity. The slight mobility of these arches when weight is applied to and removed from the foot makes walking and running more economical in terms of energy. As can be examined in a footprint, the medial longitudinal arch curves above the ground. This arch stretches from the heel bone over the \"keystone\" ankle bone to the three medial metatarsals. In contrast, the lateral longitudinal arch is very low. With the cuboid serving as its keystone, it redistributes part of the weight to the calcaneus and the distal end of the fifth metatarsal. The two longitudinal arches serve as pillars for the transverse arch which run obliquely across the tarsometatarsal joints. Excessive strain on the tendons and ligaments of the feet can result in fallen arches or flat feet.\n\nThe muscles acting on the foot can be classified into extrinsic muscles, those originating on the anterior or posterior aspect of the lower leg, and intrinsic muscles, originating on the dorsal (top) or plantar (base) aspects of the foot.\n\nAll muscles originating on the lower leg except the popliteus muscle are attached to the bones of the foot. The tibia and fibula and the interosseous membrane separate these muscles into anterior and posterior groups, in their turn subdivided into subgroups and layers.\n\"Anterior group\"\n\n\"Extensor group\": tibialis anterior originates on the proximal half of the tibia and the interosseous membrane and is inserted near the tarsometatarsal joint of the first digit. In the non-weight-bearing leg tibialis anterior flexes the foot dorsally and lift its medial edge (supination). In the weight-bearing leg it brings the leg towards the back of the foot, like in rapid walking. Extensor digitorum longus arises on the lateral tibial condyle and along the fibula to be inserted on the second to fifth digits and proximally on the fifth metatarsal. The extensor digitorum longus acts similar to the tibialis anterior except that it also dorsiflexes the digits. Extensor hallucis longus originates medially on the fibula and is inserted on the first digit. As the name implies it dorsiflexes the big toe and also acts on the ankle in the unstressed leg. In the weight-bearing leg it acts similar to the tibialis anterior.\n\"Peroneal group\": peroneus longus arises on the proximal aspect of the fibula and peroneus brevis below it on the same bone. Together, their tendons pass behind the lateral malleolus. Distally, peroneus longus crosses the plantar side of the foot to reach its insertion on the first tarsometatarsal joint, while peroneus brevis reaches the proximal part of the fifth metatarsal. These two muscles are the strongest pronators and aid in plantar flexion. Longus also acts like a bowstring that braces the transverse arch of the foot.\n\n\"Posterior group\"\n\nThe \"superficial layer\" of posterior leg muscles is formed by the triceps surae and the plantaris. The triceps surae consists of the soleus and the two heads of the gastrocnemius. The heads of gastrocnemius arise on the femur, proximal to the condyles, and soleus arises on the proximal dorsal parts of the tibia and fibula. The tendons of these muscles merge to be inserted onto the calcaneus as the Achilles tendon. Plantaris originates on the femur proximal to the lateral head of the gastrocnemius and its long tendon is embedded medially into the Achilles tendon. The triceps surae is the primary plantar flexor and its strength becomes most obvious during ballet dancing. It is fully activated only with the knee extended because the gastrocnemius is shortened during knee flexion. During walking it not only lifts the heel, but also flexes the knee, assisted by the plantaris.\n\nIn the \"deep layer\" of posterior muscles tibialis posterior arises proximally on the back of the interosseous membrane and adjoining bones and divides into two parts in the sole of the foot to attach to the tarsus. In the non-weight-bearing leg, it produces plantar flexion and supination, and, in the weight-bearing leg, it proximates the heel to the calf. flexor hallucis longus arises on the back of the fibula (i.e. on the lateral side), and its relatively thick muscle belly extends distally down to the flexor retinaculum where it passes over to the medial side to stretch across the sole to the distal phalanx of the first digit. The popliteus is also part of this group, but, with its oblique course across the back of the knee, does not act on the foot.\nOn the \"back\" (top) \"of the foot\", the tendons of extensor digitorum brevis and extensor hallucis brevis lie deep to the system of long extrinsic extensor tendons. They both arise on the calcaneus and extend into the dorsal aponeurosis of digits one to four, just beyond the penultimate joints. They act to dorsiflex the digits.\n\nSimilar to the intrinsic muscles of the hand, there are three groups of muscles in the \"sole of foot\", those of the first and last digits, and a central group:\n\n\"Muscles of the big toe\": abductor hallucis stretches medially along the border of the sole, from the calcaneus to the first digit. Below its tendon, the tendons of the long flexors pass through the tarsal canal. It is an abductor and a weak flexor, and also helps maintain the arch of the foot. flexor hallucis brevis arises on the medial cuneiform bone and related ligaments and tendons. An important plantar flexor, it is crucial for ballet dancing. Both these muscles are inserted with two heads proximally and distally to the first metatarsophalangeal joint. Adductor hallucis is part of this group, though it originally formed a separate system (see contrahens.) It has two heads, the oblique head originating obliquely across the central part of the midfoot, and the transverse head originating near the metatarsophalangeal joints of digits five to three. Both heads are inserted into the lateral sesamoid bone of the first digit. Adductor hallucis acts as a tensor of the plantar arches and also adducts the big toe and then might plantar flex the proximal phalanx.\n\"Muscles of the little toe\": Stretching laterally from the calcaneus to the proximal phalanx of the fifth digit, abductor digiti minimi form the lateral margin of the foot and is the largest of the muscles of the fifth digit. Arising from the base of the fifth metatarsal, flexor digiti minimi is inserted together with abductor on the first phalanx. Often absent, opponens digiti minimi originates near the cuboid bone and is inserted on the fifth metatarsal bone. These three muscles act to support the arch of the foot and to plantar flex the fifth digit.\n\n\"Central muscle group\": The four lumbricals arise on the medial side of the tendons of flexor digitorum longus and are inserted on the medial margins of the proximal phalanges. Quadratus plantae originates with two slips from the lateral and medial margins of the calcaneus and inserts into the lateral margin of the flexor digitorum tendon. It is also known as flexor accessorius. Flexor digitorum brevis arise inferiorly on the calcaneus and its three tendons are inserted into the middle phalanges of digits two to four (sometimes also the fifth digit). These tendons divide before their insertions and the tendons of flexor digitorum longus pass through these divisions. Flexor digitorum brevis flexes the middle phalanges. It is occasionally absent. Between the toes, the dorsal and plantar interossei stretch from the metatarsals to the proximal phalanges of digits two to five. The plantar interossei adducts and the dorsal interossei abducts these digits and are also plantar flexors at the metatarsophalangeal joints.\n\nDue to their position and function, feet are exposed to a variety of potential infections and injuries, including athlete's foot, bunions, ingrown toenails, Morton's neuroma, plantar fasciitis, plantar warts and stress fractures. In addition, there are several genetic disorders that can affect the shape and function of the feet, including a club foot or flat feet.\n\nThis leaves humans more vulnerable to medical problems that are caused by poor leg and foot alignments. Also, the wearing of shoes, sneakers and boots can impede proper alignment and movement within the ankle and foot. For example, High-heeled footwear are known to throw off the natural weight balance (this can also affect the lower back). For the sake of posture, flat soles with no heels are advised.\n\nA doctor who specializes in the treatment of the feet practices podiatry and is called a podiatrist. A pedorthist specializes in the use and modification of footwear to treat problems related to the lower limbs.\nFractures of the foot include:\nFoot sweat is the major cause of foot odor. Sweat itself is odorless, but it creates a beneficial environment for certain bacteria to grow and produce bad-smelling substances.\n\nIn anatomy, pronation is a rotational movement of the forearm (at the radioulnar joint) or foot (at the subtalar and talocalcaneonavicular joints). Pronation of the foot refers to how the body distributes weight as it cycles through the gait. During the gait cycle the foot can pronate in many different ways based on rearfoot and forefoot function. Types of pronation include neutral pronation, underpronation (supination), and overpronation.\n\nAn individual who neutrally pronates initially strikes the ground on the lateral side of the heel. As the individual transfers weight from the heel to the metatarsus, the foot will roll in a medial direction, such that the weight is distributed evenly across the metatarsus. In this stage of the gait, the knee will generally, but not always, track directly over the hallux.\n\nThis rolling inwards motion as the foot progresses from heel to toe is the way that the body naturally absorbs shock. Neutral pronation is the most ideal, efficient type of gait when using a heel strike gait; in a forefoot strike, the body absorbs shock instead via flexation of the foot.\n\nAs with a neutral pronator, an individual who overpronates initially strikes the ground on the lateral side of the heel. As the individual transfers weight from the heel to the metatarsus, however, the foot will roll too far in a medial direction, such that the weight is distributed unevenly across the metatarsus, with excessive weight borne on the hallux. In this stage of the gait, the knee will generally, but not always, track inwards.\n\nAn overpronator does not absorb shock efficiently. Imagine someone jumping onto a diving board, but the board is so flimsy that when it is struck, it bends and allows the person to plunge straight down into the water instead of back into the air. Similarly, an overpronator's arches will collapse, or the ankles will roll inwards (or a combination of the two) as they cycle through the gait. An individual whose bone structure involves external rotation at the hip, knee, or ankle will be more likely to overpronate than one whose bone structure has internal rotation or central alignment. An individual who overpronates tends to wear down their running shoes on the medial (inside) side of the shoe towards the toe area.\n\nWhen choosing a running or walking shoe, a person with overpronation can choose shoes that have good inside support—usually by strong material at the inside sole and arch of the shoe. It is usually visible. The inside support area is marked by strong greyish material to support the weight when a person lands on the outside foot and then roll onto the inside foot.\n\nAn individual who underpronates also initially strikes the ground on the lateral side of the heel. As the individual transfers weight from the heel to the metatarsus, the foot will not roll far enough in a medial direction. The weight is distributed unevenly across the metatarsus, with excessive weight borne on the fifth metatarsal, towards the lateral side of the foot. In this stage of the gait, the knee will generally, but not always, track laterally of the hallux.\n\nLike an overpronator, an underpronator does not absorb shock efficiently – but for the opposite reason. The underpronated foot is like a diving board that, instead of failing to spring someone in the air because it is too flimsy, fails to do so because it is too rigid. There is virtually no give. An underpronator's arches or ankles don't experience much motion as they cycle through the gait. An individual whose bone structure involves internal rotation at the hip, knee, or ankle will be more likely to underpronate than one whose bone structure has external rotation or central alignment. Usually – but not always – those who are bow-legged tend to underpronate. An individual who underpronates tends to wear down their running shoes on the lateral (outside) side of the shoe towards the rear of the shoe in the heel area.\n\nHumans usually wear shoes or similar footwear for protection from hazards when walking outside. There are a number of contexts where it is considered inappropriate to wear shoes. Some people consider it rude to wear shoes into a house and a Māori Marae should only be entered with bare feet.\n\nFoot fetishism is the most common form of sexual fetish.\n\nA paw is the soft foot of a mammal, generally a quadruped, that has claws or nails (e.g., a cat or dog's paw). A hard foot is called a hoof. Depending on style of locomotion, animals can be classified as plantigrade (sole walking), digitigrade (toe walking), or unguligrade (nail walking).\n\nThe metatarsals are the bones that make up the main part of the foot in humans, and part of the leg in large animals or paw in smaller animals. The number of metatarsals are directly related to the mode of locomotion with many larger animals having their digits reduced to two (elk, cow, sheep) or one (horse). The metatarsal bones of feet and paws are tightly grouped compared to, most notably, the human hand where the thumb metacarpal diverges from the rest of the metacarpus.\n\nThe word \"foot\" is used to refer to a \"...linear measure was in Old English (the exact length has varied over time), this being considered the length of a man's foot; a unit of measure used widely and anciently. In this sense the plural is often foot. The current inch and foot are implied from measurements in 12c.\" \nThe word \"foot\" also has a musical meaning; a \"...metrical foot (late Old English, translating Latin pes, Greek pous in the same sense) is commonly taken to represent one rise and one fall of a foot: keeping time according to some, dancing according to others.\"\n\nThe word \"foot\" was used in Middle English to mean \"a person\" (c. 1200).\nThe expression \"...to put one's best foot foremost first recorded 1849 (Shakespeare has the better foot before, 1596)\". The expression to \"...put one's foot in (one's) mouth \"say something stupid\" was first used in 1942. The expression \"put (one's) foot in something\" meaning to \"make a mess of it\" is from was used in 1823.\n\nThe word \"footloose\" was first used in the 1690s, meaning \"free to move the feet, unshackled\"; the more \"figurative sense of \"free to act as one pleases\" was first used in 1873. Like \"footloose\", \"flat-footed\" at first had its obvious literal meaning (in 1600, it meant \"with flat feet\") but by 1912 it meant \"unprepared\" (U.S. baseball slang).\n\n", "id": "11492", "title": "Foot"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=529916", "text": "Coronary arteries\n\nThe coronary arteries are the arteries of the coronary circulation that transport blood into and out of the cardiac muscle. They are mainly composed of the left and right coronary arteries both of which give off branches.\n\nThe left coronary artery, arises from the aorta above the left cusp of the aortic valve and feeds blood to the left side of the heart. It branches into two arteries and sometimes a third branch is formed at the fork, known as a \"ramus\" or \"intermediate artery\".\n\nThe right coronary artery, originates from above the right cusp of the aortic valve. It travels down the right coronary sulcus, towards the crux of the heart.\n\nThere is also the conus artery, which is only present in about 45 per cent of the human population, and which may provide collateral blood flow to the heart when the left anterior descending artery is occluded.\n\nEither or both arteriosclerosis and atherosclerosis, can cause one or more of the coronary arteries or their branches to become seriously blocked. Coronary artery bypass surgery can be performed to bypass the blockages.\n\nThe coronary arteries can constrict as a response to various stimuli, mostly chemical. This is known as a coronary reflex.\n\nThere is also a rare condition known as spontaneous coronary artery dissection.\n", "id": "529916", "title": "Coronary arteries"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33605847", "text": "Vieussens valve of the coronary sinus\n\nThe Vieussens valve of the coronary sinus is a valve and anatomic landmark between the coronary sinus and the great cardiac vein. It is often a flimsy valve composed of one to three leaflets found in 80% to 90% of people. It is clinically important because it is often an obstruction to catheters in 20% of patients.\n", "id": "33605847", "title": "Vieussens valve of the coronary sinus"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2410386", "text": "Sagittal plane\n\nA sagittal plane [ˈsæ.dʒɪ.tl̩] is an anatomical plane which divides the body into right and left parts. The plane may be in the center of the body and split it into two halves (mid-sagittal) or away from the midline and split it into unequal parts (para-sagittal).\n\nMost elements of Irish dancing occur in the sagittal plane.\n\nExamples include:\n\n\nThe term \"sagittal\" is derived from the Latin word \"sagitta\", meaning \"arrow\". An image of an arrow piercing a body and passing from front (anterior) to back (posterior) on a parabolic trajectory would be one way to demonstrate the derivation of the term. Another explanation would be the notching of the sagittal suture posteriorly by the lambdoidal suture —similar to feathers on an arrow.\n\n", "id": "2410386", "title": "Sagittal plane"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14471564", "text": "Outline of medicine\n\nThe following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to medicine:\n\nMedicine – science of healing. It encompasses a variety of health care practices evolved to maintain and restore health by the prevention and treatment of illness.\n\n\n\nHistory of medicine\n\nMedical biology\n\n\n\nPractice of medicine\n\nDrugs\n\nMedical equipment\n\n\nMedical education – education related to the practice of being a medical practitioner; either the initial training to become a physician, additional training thereafter, and fellowship.\n\nMedical research\n\nMedical terminology\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n", "id": "14471564", "title": "Outline of medicine"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18957", "text": "Medicine\n\nMedicine is the science and practice of the diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of disease. Medicine encompasses a variety of health care practices evolved to maintain and restore health by the prevention and treatment of illness. Contemporary medicine applies biomedical sciences, biomedical research, genetics, and medical technology to diagnose, treat, and prevent injury and disease, typically through pharmaceuticals or surgery, but also through therapies as diverse as psychotherapy, external splints and traction, medical devices, biologics, and ionizing radiation, amongst others.\n\nMedicine has existed for thousands of years, during most of which it was an art (an area of skill and knowledge) frequently having connections to the religious and philosophical beliefs of local culture. For example, a medicine man would apply herbs and say prayers for healing, or an ancient philosopher and physician would apply bloodletting according to the theories of humorism. In recent centuries, since the advent of modern science, most medicine has become a combination of art and science (both basic and applied, under the umbrella of medical science). While stitching technique for sutures is an art learned through practice, the knowledge of what happens at the cellular and molecular level in the tissues being stitched arises through science.\n\nPrescientific forms of medicine are now known as traditional medicine and folk medicine. They remain commonly used with or instead of scientific medicine and are thus called alternative medicine. For example, evidence on the effectiveness of acupuncture is \"variable and inconsistent\" for any condition, but is generally safe when done by an appropriately trained practitioner. In contrast, treatments outside the bounds of safety and efficacy are termed quackery.\n\nMedicine (British English ; American English ) is the science and practice of the diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of disease. The word \"medicine\" is derived from Latin \"medicus\", meaning \"a physician\".\n\nMedical availability and clinical practice varies across the world due to regional differences in culture and technology. Modern scientific medicine is highly developed in the Western world, while in developing countries such as parts of Africa or Asia, the population may rely more heavily on traditional medicine with limited evidence and efficacy and no required formal training for practitioners. Even in the developed world however, evidence-based medicine is not universally used in clinical practice; for example, a 2007 survey of literature reviews found that about 49% of the interventions lacked sufficient evidence to support either benefit or harm.\n\nIn modern clinical practice, physicians personally assess patients in order to diagnose, treat, and prevent disease using clinical judgment. The doctor-patient relationship typically begins an interaction with an examination of the patient's medical history and medical record, followed by a medical interview and a physical examination. Basic diagnostic medical devices (e.g. stethoscope, tongue depressor) are typically used. After examination for signs and interviewing for symptoms, the doctor may order medical tests (e.g. blood tests), take a biopsy, or prescribe pharmaceutical drugs or other therapies. Differential diagnosis methods help to rule out conditions based on the information provided. During the encounter, properly informing the patient of all relevant facts is an important part of the relationship and the development of trust. The medical encounter is then documented in the medical record, which is a legal document in many jurisdictions. Follow-ups may be shorter but follow the same general procedure, and specialists follow a similar process. The diagnosis and treatment may take only a few minutes or a few weeks depending upon the complexity of the issue.\n\nThe components of the medical interview and encounter are:\n\nThe physical examination is the examination of the patient for medical signs of disease, which are objective and observable, in contrast to symptoms which are volunteered by the patient and not necessarily objectively observable. The healthcare provider uses the senses of sight, hearing, touch, and sometimes smell (e.g., in infection, uremia, diabetic ketoacidosis). Four actions are the basis of physical examination: inspection, palpation (feel), percussion (tap to determine resonance characteristics), and auscultation (listen), generally in that order although auscultation occurs prior to percussion and palpation for abdominal assessments.\n\nThe clinical examination involves the study of:\n\nIt is to likely focus on areas of interest highlighted in the medical history and may not include everything listed above.\n\nThe treatment plan may include ordering additional medical laboratory tests and medical imaging studies, starting therapy, referral to a specialist, or watchful observation. Follow-up may be advised. Depending upon the health insurance plan and the managed care system, various forms of \"utilization review\", such as prior authorization of tests, may place barriers on accessing expensive services.\n\nThe medical decision-making (MDM) process involves analysis and synthesis of all the above data to come up with a list of possible diagnoses (the differential diagnoses), along with an idea of what needs to be done to obtain a definitive diagnosis that would explain the patient's problem.\n\nOn subsequent visits, the process may be repeated in an abbreviated manner to obtain any new history, symptoms, physical findings, and lab or imaging results or specialist consultations.\n\nContemporary medicine is in general conducted within health care systems. Legal, credentialing and financing frameworks are established by individual governments, augmented on occasion by international organizations, such as churches. The characteristics of any given health care system have significant impact on the way medical care is provided.\n\nFrom ancient times, Christian emphasis on practical charity gave rise to the development of systematic nursing and hospitals and the Catholic Church today remains the largest non-government provider of medical services in the world. Advanced industrial countries (with the exception of the United States) and many developing countries provide medical services through a system of universal health care that aims to guarantee care for all through a single-payer health care system, or compulsory private or co-operative health insurance. This is intended to ensure that the entire population has access to medical care on the basis of need rather than ability to pay. Delivery may be via private medical practices or by state-owned hospitals and clinics, or by charities, most commonly by a combination of all three.\n\nMost tribal societies provide no guarantee of healthcare for the population as a whole. In such societies, healthcare is available to those that can afford to pay for it or have self-insured it (either directly or as part of an employment contract) or who may be covered by care financed by the government or tribe directly.\n\nTransparency of information is another factor defining a delivery system. Access to information on conditions, treatments, quality, and pricing greatly affects the choice by patients/consumers and, therefore, the incentives of medical professionals. While the US healthcare system has come under fire for lack of openness, new legislation may encourage greater openness. There is a perceived tension between the need for transparency on the one hand and such issues as patient confidentiality and the possible exploitation of information for commercial gain on the other.\n\nProvision of medical care is classified into primary, secondary, and tertiary care categories.\nPrimary care medical services are provided by physicians, physician assistants, nurse practitioners, or other health professionals who have first contact with a patient seeking medical treatment or care. These occur in physician offices, clinics, nursing homes, schools, home visits, and other places close to patients. About 90% of medical visits can be treated by the primary care provider. These include treatment of acute and chronic illnesses, preventive care and health education for all ages and both sexes.\n\nSecondary care medical services are provided by medical specialists in their offices or clinics or at local community hospitals for a patient referred by a primary care provider who first diagnosed or treated the patient. Referrals are made for those patients who required the expertise or procedures performed by specialists. These include both ambulatory care and inpatient services, emergency rooms, intensive care medicine, surgery services, physical therapy, labor and delivery, endoscopy units, diagnostic laboratory and medical imaging services, hospice centers, etc. Some primary care providers may also take care of hospitalized patients and deliver babies in a secondary care setting.\n\nTertiary care medical services are provided by specialist hospitals or regional centers equipped with diagnostic and treatment facilities not generally available at local hospitals. These include trauma centers, burn treatment centers, advanced neonatology unit services, organ transplants, high-risk pregnancy, radiation oncology, etc.\n\nModern medical care also depends on information – still delivered in many health care settings on paper records, but increasingly nowadays by electronic means.\n\nIn low-income countries, modern healthcare is often too expensive for the average person. International healthcare policy researchers have advocated that \"user fees\" be removed in these areas to ensure access, although even after removal, significant costs and barriers remain.\n\nSeparation of prescribing and dispensing is a practice in medicine and pharmacy in which the physician who provides a medical prescription is independent from the pharmacist who provides the prescription drug. In the Western world there are centuries of tradition for separating pharmacists from physicians. In Asian countries it is traditional for physicians to also provide drugs.\n\nWorking together as an interdisciplinary team, many highly trained health professionals besides medical practitioners are involved in the delivery of modern health care. Examples include: nurses, emergency medical technicians and paramedics, laboratory scientists, pharmacists, podiatrists, physiotherapists, respiratory therapists, speech therapists, occupational therapists, radiographers, dietitians, and bioengineers, surgeons, surgeon's assistant, surgical technologist.\n\nThe scope and sciences underpinning human medicine overlap many other fields. Dentistry, while considered by some a separate discipline from medicine, is a medical field.\n\nA patient admitted to the hospital is usually under the care of a specific team based on their main presenting problem, e.g., the cardiology team, who then may interact with other specialties, e.g., surgical, radiology, to help diagnose or treat the main problem or any subsequent complications/developments.\n\nPhysicians have many specializations and subspecializations into certain branches of medicine, which are listed below. There are variations from country to country regarding which specialties certain subspecialties are in.\n\nThe main branches of medicine are:\n\n\n\nIn the broadest meaning of \"medicine\", there are many different specialties. In the UK, most specialities have their own body or college, which have its own entrance examination. These are collectively known as the Royal Colleges, although not all currently use the term \"Royal\". The development of a speciality is often driven by new technology (such as the development of effective anaesthetics) or ways of working (such as emergency departments); the new specialty leads to the formation of a unifying body of doctors and the prestige of administering their own examination.\n\nWithin medical circles, specialities usually fit into one of two broad categories: \"Medicine\" and \"Surgery.\" \"Medicine\" refers to the practice of non-operative medicine, and most of its subspecialties require preliminary training in Internal Medicine. In the UK, this was traditionally evidenced by passing the examination for the Membership of the Royal College of Physicians (MRCP) or the equivalent college in Scotland or Ireland. \"Surgery\" refers to the practice of operative medicine, and most subspecialties in this area require preliminary training in General Surgery, which in the UK leads to membership of the Royal College of Surgeons of England (MRCS). At present, some specialties of medicine do not fit easily into either of these categories, such as radiology, pathology, or anesthesia. Most of these have branched from one or other of the two camps above; for example anaesthesia developed first as a faculty of the Royal College of Surgeons (for which MRCS/FRCS would have been required) before becoming the Royal College of Anaesthetists and membership of the college is attained by sitting for the examination of the Fellowship of the Royal College of Anesthetists (FRCA).\n\nSurgery is an ancient medical specialty that uses operative manual and instrumental techniques on a patient to investigate or treat a pathological condition such as disease or injury, to help improve bodily function or appearance or to repair unwanted ruptured areas (for example, a perforated ear drum). Surgeons must also manage pre-operative, post-operative, and potential surgical candidates on the hospital wards. Surgery has many sub-specialties, including \"general surgery, ophthalmic surgery, cardiovascular surgery, colorectal surgery, neurosurgery, oral and maxillofacial surgery, oncologic surgery, orthopedic surgery, otolaryngology, plastic surgery, podiatric surgery, transplant surgery, trauma surgery, urology, vascular surgery, and pediatric surgery.\" In some centers, anesthesiology is part of the division of surgery (for historical and logistical reasons), although it is not a surgical discipline. Other medical specialties may employ surgical procedures, such as ophthalmology and dermatology, but are not considered surgical sub-specialties per se.\n\nSurgical training in the U.S. requires a minimum of five years of residency after medical school. Sub-specialties of surgery often require seven or more years. In addition, fellowships can last an additional one to three years. Because post-residency fellowships can be competitive, many trainees devote two additional years to research. Thus in some cases surgical training will not finish until more than a decade after medical school. Furthermore, surgical training can be very difficult and time-consuming.\n\nInternal medicine is the medical specialty dealing with the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of adult diseases. According to some sources, an emphasis on internal structures is implied. In North America, specialists in internal medicine are commonly called \"internists.\" Elsewhere, especially in Commonwealth nations, such specialists are often called physicians. These terms, \"internist\" or \"physician\" (in the narrow sense, common outside North America), generally exclude practitioners of gynecology and obstetrics, pathology, psychiatry, and especially surgery and its subspecialities.\n\nBecause their patients are often seriously ill or require complex investigations, internists do much of their work in hospitals. Formerly, many internists were not subspecialized; such \"general physicians\" would see any complex nonsurgical problem; this style of practice has become much less common. In modern urban practice, most internists are subspecialists: that is, they generally limit their medical practice to problems of one organ system or to one particular area of medical knowledge. For example, gastroenterologists and nephrologists specialize respectively in diseases of the gut and the kidneys.\n\nIn the Commonwealth of Nations and some other countries, specialist pediatricians and geriatricians are also described as \"specialist physicians\" (or internists) who have subspecialized by age of patient rather than by organ system. Elsewhere, especially in North America, general pediatrics is often a form of primary care.\n\nThere are many subspecialities (or subdisciplines) of internal medicine:\n\nTraining in internal medicine (as opposed to surgical training), varies considerably across the world: see the articles on \"medical education\" and \"physician\" for more details. In North America, it requires at least three years of residency training after medical school, which can then be followed by a one- to three-year fellowship in the subspecialties listed above. In general, resident work hours in medicine are less than those in surgery, averaging about 60 hours per week in the US. This difference does not apply in the UK where all doctors are now required by law to work less than 48 hours per week on average.\n\n\nThe followings are some major medical specialties that do not directly fit into any of the above-mentioned groups:\n\n\nSome interdisciplinary sub-specialties of medicine include:\n\nMedical education and training varies around the world. It typically involves entry level education at a university medical school, followed by a period of supervised practice or internship, or residency. This can be followed by postgraduate vocational training. A variety of teaching methods have been employed in medical education, still itself a focus of active research. In Canada and the United States of America, a Doctor of Medicine degree, often abbreviated M.D., or a Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine degree, often abbreviated as D.O. and unique to the United States, must be completed in and delivered from a recognized university.\n\nSince knowledge, techniques, and medical technology continue to evolve at a rapid rate, many regulatory authorities require continuing medical education. Medical practitioners upgrade their knowledge in various ways, including medical journals, seminars, conferences, and online programs.\nIn most countries, it is a legal requirement for a medical doctor to be licensed or registered. In general, this entails a medical degree from a university and accreditation by a medical board or an equivalent national organization, which may ask the applicant to pass exams. This restricts the considerable legal authority of the medical profession to physicians that are trained and qualified by national standards. It is also intended as an assurance to patients and as a safeguard against charlatans that practice inadequate medicine for personal gain. While the laws generally require medical doctors to be trained in \"evidence based\", Western, or Hippocratic Medicine, they are not intended to discourage different paradigms of health.\n\nIn the European Union, the profession of doctor of medicine is regulated. A profession is said to be regulated when access and exercise is subject to the possession of a specific professional qualification.\nThe regulated professions database contains a list of regulated professions for doctor of medicine in the EU member states, EEA countries and Switzerland. This list is covered by the Directive 2005/36/EC.\n\nDoctors who are negligent or intentionally harmful in their care of patients can face charges of medical malpractice and be subject to civil, criminal, or professional sanctions.\n\nMedical ethics is a system of moral principles that apply values and judgments to the practice of medicine. As a scholarly discipline, medical ethics encompasses its practical application in clinical settings as well as work on its history, philosophy, theology, and sociology. Six of the values that commonly apply to medical ethics discussions are:\n\nValues such as these do not give answers as to how to handle a particular situation, but provide a useful framework for understanding conflicts. When moral values are in conflict, the result may be an ethical dilemma or crisis. Sometimes, no good solution to a dilemma in medical ethics exists, and occasionally, the values of the medical community (i.e., the hospital and its staff) conflict with the values of the individual patient, family, or larger non-medical community. Conflicts can also arise between health care providers, or among family members. For example, some argue that the principles of autonomy and beneficence clash when patients refuse blood transfusions, considering them life-saving; and truth-telling was not emphasized to a large extent before the HIV era.\n\nPrehistoric medicine incorporated plants (herbalism), animal parts, and minerals. In many cases these materials were used ritually as magical substances by priests, shamans, or medicine men. Well-known spiritual systems include animism (the notion of inanimate objects having spirits), spiritualism (an appeal to gods or communion with ancestor spirits); shamanism (the vesting of an individual with mystic powers); and divination (magically obtaining the truth). The field of medical anthropology examines the ways in which culture and society are organized around or impacted by issues of health, health care and related issues.\n\nEarly records on medicine have been discovered from ancient Egyptian medicine, Babylonian Medicine, Ayurvedic medicine (in the Indian subcontinent), classical Chinese medicine (predecessor to the modern traditional Chinese medicine), and ancient Greek medicine and Roman medicine.\n\nIn Egypt, Imhotep (3rd millennium BC) is the first physician in history known by name. The oldest Egyptian medical text is the \"Kahun Gynaecological Papyrus\" from around 2000 BCE, which describes gynaecological diseases. The \"Edwin Smith Papyrus\" dating back to 1600 BCE is an early work on surgery, while the \"Ebers Papyrus\" dating back to 1500 BCE is akin to a textbook on medicine.\n\nIn China, archaeological evidence of medicine in Chinese dates back to the Bronze Age Shang Dynasty, based on seeds for herbalism and tools presumed to have been used for surgery. The \"Huangdi Neijing\", the progenitor of Chinese medicine, is a medical text written beginning in the 2nd century BCE and compiled in the 3rd century.\n\nIn India, the surgeon Sushruta described numerous surgical operations, including the earliest forms of plastic surgery. Earliest records of dedicated hospitals come from Mihintale in Sri Lanka where evidence of dedicated medicinal treatment facilities for patients are found.\n\nIn Greece, the Greek physician Hippocrates, the \"father of modern medicine\", laid the foundation for a rational approach to medicine. Hippocrates introduced the Hippocratic Oath for physicians, which is still relevant and in use today, and was the first to categorize illnesses as acute, chronic, endemic and epidemic, and use terms such as, \"exacerbation, relapse, resolution, crisis, paroxysm, peak, and convalescence\". The Greek physician Galen was also one of the greatest surgeons of the ancient world and performed many audacious operations, including brain and eye surgeries. After the fall of the Western Roman Empire and the onset of the Early Middle Ages, the Greek tradition of medicine went into decline in Western Europe, although it continued uninterrupted in the Eastern Roman (Byzantine) Empire.\n\nMost of our knowledge of ancient Hebrew medicine during the 1st millennium BC comes from the Torah, i.e. the Five Books of Moses, which contain various health related laws and rituals. The Hebrew contribution to the development of modern medicine started in the Byzantine Era, with the physician Asaph the Jew.\n\nAfter 750 CE, the Muslim world had the works of Hippocrates, Galen and Sushruta translated into Arabic, and Islamic physicians engaged in some significant medical research. Notable Islamic medical pioneers include the Persian polymath, Avicenna, who, along with Imhotep and Hippocrates, has also been called the \"father of medicine\". He wrote \"The Canon of Medicine\", considered one of the most famous books in the history of medicine. Others include Abulcasis, Avenzoar, Ibn al-Nafis, and Averroes. Rhazes was one of the first to question the Greek theory of humorism, which nevertheless remained influential in both medieval Western and medieval Islamic medicine. \"Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah\" by Ali al-Ridha, the eighth Imam of Shia Muslims, is revered as the most precious Islamic literature in the Science of Medicine. The Persian Bimaristan hospitals were an early example of public hospitals.\n\nIn Europe, Charlemagne decreed that a hospital should be attached to each cathedral and monastery and the historian Geoffrey Blainey likened the activities of the Catholic Church in health care during the Middle Ages to an early version of a welfare state: \"It conducted hospitals for the old and orphanages for the young; hospices for the sick of all ages; places for the lepers; and hostels or inns where pilgrims could buy a cheap bed and meal\". It supplied food to the population during famine and distributed food to the poor. This welfare system the church funded through collecting taxes on a large scale and possessing large farmlands and estates. The Benedictine order was noted for setting up hospitals and infirmaries in their monasteries, growing medical herbs and becoming the chief medical care givers of their districts, as at the great Abbey of Cluny. The Church also established a network of cathedral schools and universities where medicine was studied. The Schola Medica Salernitana in Salerno, looking to the learning of Greek and Arab physicians, grew to be the finest medical school in Medieval Europe.\n\nHowever, the fourteenth and fifteenth century Black Death devastated both the Middle East and Europe, and it has even been argued that Western Europe was generally more effective in recovering from the pandemic than the Middle East. In the early modern period, important early figures in medicine and anatomy emerged in Europe, including Gabriele Falloppio and William Harvey.\n\nThe major shift in medical thinking was the gradual rejection, especially during the Black Death in the 14th and 15th centuries, of what may be called the 'traditional authority' approach to science and medicine. This was the notion that because some prominent person in the past said something must be so, then that was the way it was, and anything one observed to the contrary was an anomaly (which was paralleled by a similar shift in European society in general – see Copernicus's rejection of Ptolemy's theories on astronomy). Physicians like Vesalius improved upon or disproved some of the theories from the past. The main tomes used both by medicine students and expert physicians were Materia Medica and Pharmacopoeia.\n\nAndreas Vesalius was the author of \"De humani corporis fabrica\", an important book on human anatomy. Bacteria and microorganisms were first observed with a microscope by Antonie van Leeuwenhoek in 1676, initiating the scientific field microbiology. Independently from Ibn al-Nafis, Michael Servetus rediscovered the pulmonary circulation, but this discovery did not reach the public because it was written down for the first time in the \"Manuscript of Paris\" in 1546, and later published in the theological work for which he paid with his life in 1553. Later this was described by Renaldus Columbus and Andrea Cesalpino. Herman Boerhaave is sometimes referred to as a \"father of physiology\" due to his exemplary teaching in Leiden and textbook 'Institutiones medicae' (1708). Pierre Fauchard has been called \"the father of modern dentistry\".\n\nVeterinary medicine was, for the first time, truly separated from human medicine in 1761, when the French veterinarian Claude Bourgelat founded the world's first veterinary school in Lyon, France. Before this, medical doctors treated both humans and other animals.\n\nModern scientific biomedical research (where results are testable and reproducible) began to replace early Western traditions based on herbalism, the Greek \"four humours\" and other such pre-modern notions. The modern era really began with Edward Jenner's discovery of the smallpox vaccine at the end of the 18th century (inspired by the method of inoculation earlier practiced in Asia), Robert Koch's discoveries around 1880 of the transmission of disease by bacteria, and then the discovery of antibiotics around 1900.\n\nThe post-18th century modernity period brought more groundbreaking researchers from Europe. From Germany and Austria, doctors Rudolf Virchow, Wilhelm Conrad Röntgen, Karl Landsteiner and Otto Loewi made notable contributions. In the United Kingdom, Alexander Fleming, Joseph Lister, Francis Crick and Florence Nightingale are considered important. Spanish doctor Santiago Ramón y Cajal is considered the father of modern neuroscience.\n\nFrom New Zealand and Australia came Maurice Wilkins, Howard Florey, and Frank Macfarlane Burnet.\n\nIn the United States, William Williams Keen, William Coley, James D. Watson, Italy (Salvador Luria), Switzerland (Alexandre Yersin), Japan (Kitasato Shibasaburō), and France (Jean-Martin Charcot, Claude Bernard, Paul Broca) and others did significant work. Russian Nikolai Korotkov also did significant work, as did Sir William Osler and Harvey Cushing.\nAs science and technology developed, medicine became more reliant upon medications. Throughout history and in Europe right until the late 18th century, not only animal and plant products were used as medicine, but also human body parts and fluids. Pharmacology developed in part from herbalism and some drugs are still derived from plants (atropine, ephedrine, warfarin, aspirin, digoxin, \"vinca\" alkaloids, taxol, hyoscine, etc.). Vaccines were discovered by Edward Jenner and Louis Pasteur.\n\nThe first antibiotic was arsphenamine (Salvarsan) discovered by Paul Ehrlich in 1908 after he observed that bacteria took up toxic dyes that human cells did not. The first major class of antibiotics was the sulfa drugs, derived by German chemists originally from azo dyes.\n\nPharmacology has become increasingly sophisticated; modern biotechnology allows drugs targeted towards specific physiological processes to be developed, sometimes designed for compatibility with the body to reduce side-effects. Genomics and knowledge of human genetics is having some influence on medicine, as the causative genes of most monogenic genetic disorders have now been identified, and the development of techniques in molecular biology and genetics are influencing medical technology, practice and decision-making.\n\nEvidence-based medicine is a contemporary movement to establish the most effective algorithms of practice (ways of doing things) through the use of systematic reviews and meta-analysis. The movement is facilitated by modern global information science, which allows as much of the available evidence as possible to be collected and analyzed according to standard protocols that are then disseminated to healthcare providers. The Cochrane Collaboration leads this movement. A 2001 review of 160 Cochrane systematic reviews revealed that, according to two readers, 21.3% of the reviews concluded insufficient evidence, 20% concluded evidence of no effect, and 22.5% concluded positive effect.\n\nTraditional medicine (also known as indigenous or folk medicine) comprises knowledge systems that developed over generations within various societies before the introduction of modern medicine. The World Health Organization (WHO) defines traditional medicine as \"the sum total of the knowledge, skills, and practices based on the theories, beliefs, and experiences indigenous to different cultures, whether explicable or not, used in the maintenance of health as well as in the prevention, diagnosis, improvement or treatment of physical and mental illness.\"\n\nIn some Asian and African countries, up to 80% of the population relies on traditional medicine for their primary health care needs. When adopted outside of its traditional culture, traditional medicine is often called alternative medicine. Practices known as traditional medicines include Ayurveda, Siddha medicine, Unani, ancient Iranian medicine, Irani, Islamic medicine, traditional Chinese medicine, traditional Korean medicine, acupuncture, Muti, Ifá, and traditional African medicine.\n\nThe WHO notes however that \"inappropriate use of traditional medicines or practices can have negative or dangerous effects\" and that \"further research is needed to ascertain the efficacy and safety\" of several of the practices and medicinal plants used by traditional medicine systems. The line between alternative medicine and quackery is a contentious subject.\n\nTraditional medicine may include formalized aspects of folk medicine, that is to say longstanding remedies passed on and practised by lay people. Folk medicine consists of the healing practices and ideas of body physiology and health preservation known to some in a culture, transmitted informally as general knowledge, and practiced or applied by anyone in the culture having prior experience. Folk medicine may also be referred to as traditional medicine, alternative medicine, indigenous medicine, or natural medicine. These terms are often considered interchangeable, even though some authors may prefer one or the other because of certain overtones they may be willing to highlight. In fact, out of these terms perhaps only \"indigenous medicine\" and \"traditional medicine\" have the same meaning as \"folk medicine\", while the others should be understood rather in a modern or modernized context.\n", "id": "18957", "title": "Medicine"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12918369", "text": "Games for Health\n\nGames for Health are games that aim to either promote health or to prevent, diagnose or treat (chronic) diseases. These games, which are generally considered serious game aim to influence health outcomes by increasing the user's knowledge and changing their behaviors through play.\n\nGames for Health is also the name of series of conferences made possible in part by funding from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation as part of their Pioneer Portfolio program. Games for Health is a part of the Serious Games Initiative.\n\nThe conference has received media attention in recent years for its work to showcase the health and research implications of video games.\n\n\nGames for Health is also a peer-reviewed journal, which was launched in February 2012.\n\n\n", "id": "12918369", "title": "Games for Health"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55098697", "text": "Acid ash hypothesis\n\nThe acid-ash hypothesis is a medical hypothesis which suggests that excessively acidic diets may result in a number of identifiable health effects, including an increased risk of osteoporosis. It has received some attention in the lay community, and has been used to support the fad diet known as the Alkaline diet. According to the hypothesis, acid ash is produced by meat, poultry, cheese, fish, eggs, and grains. Alkaline ash is produced by fruits and vegetables, except cranberries, prunes and plums. Since the acid or alkaline ash designation is based on the residue left on combustion rather than the acidity of the food, foods such as citrus fruits that are generally considered acidic are actually considered alkaline producing in this diet.\n\nRecent systematic reviews have been published which have methodically analyzed the weight of available scientific evidence, and have found no significant evidence to support the acid-ash hypothesis in regard to prevention of osteoporosis. A meta-analysis of studies on the effect of dietary phosphate intake contradicted the expected results under the acid-ash hypothesis with respect to calcium in the urine and bone metabolism. This result suggests use of this diet to prevent calcium loss from bone is not justified. Other meta-analyses which have investigated the effect of total dietary acid intake have also found no evidence that acid intake increases the risk for osteoporosis as would be expected under the acid-ash hypothesis. A review looked at the effects of dairy product intake, which have been hypothesized to increase the acid load of the body through phosphate and protein components. This review found no significant evidence suggesting dairy product intake causes acidosis or increases risk for osteoporosis. A meta-analysis on the effects of alkaline potassium salts on calcium metabolism and bone health found that supplementation with alkaline potassium salts reduces loss of calcium in urine and reduces acid secretion.\n\nThe acid ash hypothesis suggests that diets high in \"acid ash\" (acid producing) elements would cause the body to try to buffer (or counteract) any additional acid load in the body by breaking down bone, leading to weaker bones and increased risk for osteoporosis. Consequently, \"alkaline ash\" (alkaline producing) elements would hypothetically decrease the risk of osteoporosis. This hypothesis has been advanced in a position statement of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics, in a publication of the U.S. National Academy of Sciences, as well as other scientific publications, which have stated foods high in potassium and magnesium such as fruits and vegetables may decrease the risk of osteoporosis through increased alkaline ash production. This acceptance of the acid-ash hypothesis as a major modifiable risk factor of osteoporosis by these publications, however, was largely made without significant critical review by high quality systematic analysis.\n\nIt has also been speculated that an alkaline diet may have an effect on muscle wasting, growth hormone metabolism or back pain, though there is no conclusive evidence to confirm these hypotheses. Given an aging population, the effects of an alkaline diet on public health may offer some benefits due to its focus on an increase in fresh fruits and vegetables, but there are limited scientific studies on the topic.\n", "id": "55098697", "title": "Acid ash hypothesis"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55200666", "text": "Rectitis\n\nRectitis is an inflammation of the inner rectum. It mainly affects the rectal mucous membrane. The condition can be acute or it may be a chronic condition. Rectitis may be caused due to conditions such as ulcerative colitis or Chron's disease.\n", "id": "55200666", "title": "Rectitis"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54762521", "text": "Host-directed therapeutics\n\nHost-directed therapeutics, also called host targeted therapeutics, act via a host-mediated responses to pathogens rather than acting directly on the pathogen, like traditional antibiotics. They can change the local environment in which the pathogen exists to make it less favorable for the pathogen to live and/or grow. With these therapies, pathogen killing, e.g.bactericidal effects, will likely only occur when it is co-delivered with a traditional agent that acts directly on the pathogen, such as an antibiotic, antifungal, or antiparasitic agent. Several antiviral agents are host-directed therapeutics, and simply slow the virus progression rather than kill the virus. Host-directed therapeutics may limit pathogen proliferation, e.g., have bacteriostatic effects.\n\n", "id": "54762521", "title": "Host-directed therapeutics"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55453598", "text": "Oxygen firebreak\n\nAn oxygen firebreak, also known as a fire stop valve or fire safety valve, is a thermal fuse designed to extinguish a fire in the delivery tube being used by a patient on oxygen therapy and stop the flow of oxygen if the tube is accidentally ignited. Oxygen firebreaks are fitted into the oxygen delivery tubing close to the patient, typically around the patient’s sternum where the two nasal cannula tubes join and connect to the delivery tubing.\n\nOxygen is not flammable, but when it is present in increased concentrations it will enable fires to start much more easily. Once a fire has started, if supplemental oxygen is present it will burn more fiercely, based on the principle of the fire triangle. Materials that do not burn in ambient air may burn when there is a greater concentration of oxygen present than there is in air.\n\nMost home oxygen fires are caused by patients smoking whilst using medical oxygen. Despite the inherent dangers, researchers estimate that between 10 and 50 per cent of home oxygen patients continue to smoke. Other sources of naked flames, such as gas flames and birthday candles, can also pose a risk.\n\nOnce a fire has started in the patient’s nasal cannula it will track back towards the oxygen source and if not stopped may lead to a ‘whole house’ fire. Whole house fires are directly correlated with single or even multiple deaths. According to the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), 25% of oxygen fires get beyond the immediate surrounding area to become ‘whole house’ fires.\n\nWhile an oxygen firebreak cannot stop the initial ignition, it can limit the potential for whole house fires, more serious injury and death. Firebreaks can also buy more time for a patient and other individuals in the building to escape, and limit the material cost of fire damage.\n\nIn 2008 the United States National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) published a report suggesting that there are 46 deaths each year in the US from 182 fires. The report also stated that US hospital emergency rooms deal with an average 1,190 cases of burns each year as a result of home oxygen fires. However, the NFPA describes these statistics as “likely underestimates”.\n\nFurther analysis by Marty Ahrens on behalf of the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) in 2013 recorded a likely average annual death rate for home fires involving oxygen administration equipment of 80 people, based upon figures between 2007 and 2011.\n\nThe Fire Administration (USFA) said in its report ‘Fire Risk in 2015’ that “While no one factor is solely responsible for the increased fire risk to older adults receiving home health care, smoking in the presence of oxygen is recognized as one important problem.”\n\nA study of home oxygen therapy patients in the Veterans Health Administration between 2009 and 2015 examined 123 cases of reported adverse events related to flash burns. It found that 100 cases (81%) resulted in injury, and 23 (19%) resulted in death. Although 89% of veterans claimed to have quit smoking, 92% of burns occurred as a result of smoking.\n\nNot all European countries monitor data on the number of fires that occur as a result of home oxygen. Despite a European Union Medical Device Directive requiring incidents to be reported to national vigilance authorities, there is often inadequate coordination to publish the information centrally. According to the German Federal Institute for Drugs and Medical Devices (Bundesinstitut fur Arzneimittel und Medizinprodukte, BfArM) it is likely that such incidents are grossly under-reported.\n\nIn England and Wales, central reporting of adverse incidents is a requirement of the NHS Service Specification for Home Oxygen. After firebreaks became mandatory in 2006, the average number of deaths by fire was 0.36 per thousand patients per year. In the US, where firebreaks were not required, almost twice as many patients (0.62 patients per thousand) died.\n\nRecent and high-profile incidents involving deaths and injuries to patients, their relatives, and fellow residents, include:\n\nA woman died in a fire which started while she was smoking and simultaneously using her oxygen cylinder. Her husband also died trying to escape the blaze.\n\nA 60-year-old wheelchair-bound patient, described as a 'big smoker', died when his liquid oxygen dewar exploded following a nighttime fire in his apartment. His wife also suffered injuries.\n\nA patient died and an apartment was destroyed after medical oxygen cylinders exploded, leading to a fire. Fifteen other residents had to be relocated after the incident.\n\nPatient Jackie Hisle Jr. was sentenced to ten years’ imprisonment on three counts of manslaughter after an incident in which his son, Donald Hisle, and two other residents were killed and six others were injured. Mr Hisle Jr. was smoking while using an oxygen concentrator, despite warnings.\n\nA jury awarded $2.5 million in damages against Apria Healthcare after the death of 72-year-old Jimmy Kelley from Knox County. The award was reduced to $1.275 million after the jury found Kelley to be partly responsible. Mr Kelley, a smoker, also used a space heater in a camper van where oxygen cylinders were stored.\n\nBefore placing a new concentrator on the market, all oxygen concentrator manufacturers need to make a 510(k) premarket submission to the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA). \n\nIf the manufacturer chose to apply ISO 80601-2-69:2014 to demonstrate the safety of the new device, the fire safety elements of the standard, including ‘a means to extinguish a tubing fire and isolate the oxygen flow’ are a requirement. Approval to market the product would then be based upon compliance to the standard.\n\nIn the European Union the fitting of firebreaks is a legal requirement for all home oxygen installations. \n\nAll economic operators in the EU, including home oxygen service providers, must comply with the Medical Device Directive (93/42/EEC) or the Medical Device Regulation (2017/745).\n\nThe instructions for use for an oxygen concentrator placed on the EU single market must include an instruction to the effect that a firebreak shall be fitted close to the patient to stop the flow of oxygen in the event of a fire. By including this statement the oxygen concentrator manufacturer is complying with the harmonised EN ISO type standard for oxygen concentrators EN ISO 8359:2009+A1:2012, which provides the manufacturer with an immediate presumption of conformity to the Essential Requirements of the Medical Devices Directive and allows them to properly apply the CE mark. Since January 2015 all instructions for use provided with oxygen concentrators placed on the European market will include this statement.\n\nThe applied CE mark is reliant on the home oxygen service provider following this instruction and fitting a firebreak. If the firebreak is not fitted, then the Essential Requirements for performance and safety are not met and the CE mark is no longer valid. It also means that the home oxygen service provider’s status, within the framework under which the single market for medical devices operates, changes from ‘distributor’ to ‘manufacturer’. This has significant regulatory implications.\n\nThe Medical Devices Directive also requires that economic operators adopt solutions that ‘reduce risk as far as possible’ in line with the ‘state of the art’. The fitting of firebreaks is therefore a requirement irrespective of the oxygen source, including oxygen concentrators, oxygen Dewars or gas cylinders. \n\nAn additional legal requirement applies in the UK, where the fitting of firebreaks has been mandatory under the service specification of the home oxygen service since 2006.\n\nIn 2011, the German Federal Institute for Drugs and Medical Devices (Bundesinstitut fur Arzneimittel und Medizinprodukte, BfArM) recommended ‘corrective actions to prevent fires in oxygen concentrators’. BfArM issued an assessment notice (Case no. 2676/10) stating that from July 1, 2012 all devices should be equipped with installations for stopping encroachment of the fire into the device, and interruption of the delivery of oxygen in the accessory as close to the patient as possible, in case of ignition. Manufacturers were also required to offer retrospective refitting for devices placed on the market before July 1, 2012.\n\nIn its guidance on the use of oxygen concentrators ‘Technical specifications for oxygen concentrators’ the World Health Organization recommends ‘firebreak connectors to stop the oxygen ﬂow in the event of fire’.\n\nThree main standards cover the use of oxygen firebreaks:\n\nThe safety requirements for oxygen concentrators are governed by the amended standard ISO 8359:1996+A1:2012. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recognized the standard from January 2014. In January 2015, it was superseded by ISO 80601-2-69:2014. Health Canada, which is responsible for national public health, still recognizes the standard. \n\nAll of the 28 CEN (European Committee for Standardization) national standardization bodies (NSBs) have published EN ISO 8359:2009+A1:2012 as national standards. In Europe EN ISO 8359:2009+A1:2012 has harmonized standard status, which triggers ‘presumption of conformity’.\n\nIncluded in ISO 80601-2-69:2014 are specific requirements that serve to mitigate the risk of fire related to oxygen therapy. The requirements state that the following should be provided:\n", "id": "55453598", "title": "Oxygen firebreak"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55985926", "text": "Slow medicine\n\nSlow medicine is a movement calling for change in medical practice which took inspiration from the wider slow food movement. Practitioners of slow medicine have published several different definitions, but the common emphasis is on the word \"slow,\" meaning to allow the medical practitioner to have sufficient time with the patient. Like for the slow food movement, slow medicine is a call to balance over-emphasis on fast processes which reduce quality. \n\nThe first mention of slow medicine in print took place in the first decade of the twenty-first century, about fifteen years after the start of the slow food movement in Italy. In the year 2002 an article was published in an Italian medical journal which used the words \"slow medicine\" to mean an approach to medicine which would allow practitioners sufficient time to evaluate the patient and his or her wider social context, to reduce anxiety, to evaluate new methods and technologies, to prevent premature release from the hospital and also to provide adequate emotional support. Later, in English-language publications, several physicians independently started using the term slow medicine.\n\nA slow medicine society was formed in Italy in the year 2011, and the first Italian national conference on slow medicine took place in Turin, Italy in November, 2011. Since that time, slow medicine societies have been formed in other countries.\n\nDifferent medical practitioners emphasize different aspects of medicine when using the term \"slow medicine.\" For some, slow medicine means taking time and not rushing when evaluating a patient. For others, slow medicine is a careful evaluation of medical evidence and a desire not to \"overdiagnose\" or \"overtreat.\" The original Slow Medicine society in Italy points to three key words of being \"measured,\" \"respectful\" and \"equitable,\" which focuses on the social and political aspects of medicine. One early practitioner of slow medicine sees the patient in the metaphor of a plant which needs to be nourished and for impediments to be removed in order to allow healing to occur.\n\n\n", "id": "55985926", "title": "Slow medicine"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55676424", "text": "ALS Functional Rating Scale - Revised\n\nAmyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS), is a neurodegenerative disease that typically affects adults around 54-67 years of age, although anyone can be diagnosed with the disease. People diagnosed with ALS live on average 2–4 years after diagnosis due to the quick progression of the disease. The progression and severity of ALS is rated by doctors on the ALS Functional Rating Scale, which has been revised and is referred to as ALSFRS-R.\n\nALSFRS-R includes 12 questions that can have a score of 0 to 4. A score of 0 on a question would indicate no function while a score of 4 would indicate full function.  This scale has been useful for doctors in diagnosing patients, measuring disease progression and also for researchers when selecting patients for a study and measuring the potential effects of a clinical trial.\n\nThe ALSFRS-R scale has some limitations though since it is not useful to compare scores of people who present with different onset. In ALS the main type of onset is bulbar, followed by limb-onset; which describes the region of motor neurons first affected. Individuals may also present with respiratory onset, but this occurs very rarely. Since there are three different types of ALS, ALSFRS-R scores are often grouped in categories depending on type of onset.\n\nSince there are three main pathways of progression, the questions are also divided in relation to the types of onset. Questions 1 to 3 are related to bulbar onset, questions 4 to 9 are related to limb onset and questions 10-12 are related to respiratory onset.\n\nALSFRS-R scores calculated at diagnosis can be compared to scores throughout time to determine the speed of progression. The rate of change, called the ALSFRS-R slope can be used as a prognostic indicator.\n\nAlthough the ALSFRS-R score is a recognized prognostic indicator, it is more useful to compare various indicators including vital capacity (FVC%) and the Sickness Impact Profile (SIP) to increase the accuracy of a given prognosis.\n\nRelating the ALSFRS-R score to staging criteria is also useful in determining prognosis. King's system relies on the clinical spread of disease as a measure of progression while Milano-Torino Staging (MiToS) utilizes the subscores produced by the ALSFRS-R to define stages.\n\nThe questions used to determine an individuals ALSFRS-R score are listed below.\n", "id": "55676424", "title": "ALS Functional Rating Scale - Revised"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56267867", "text": "Asif Ahmed (academic)\n\nAsif Ahmed FRSB (born 1st June 1960) is a British vascular and obstetric scientist and an entrepreneur. He is responsible for founding Aston Medical School, the second medical school to be established in the city of Birmingham after 200 years. Aston Medical School has social mobility and leadership at the core of its model without compromising entry standards. Ahmed's discoveries and his disrupitve approach have led to new clinical trials designed to treat the deadliest maternal hypertensive disorder, preeclampsia. He has a longstanding interest in the mechanisms of vascular endothelial growth factor signalling, endothelial cell protection and has developed new strategies for preventing preeclampsia. He is widely recognized as the first person to propose and initiate the first clinical trial on statins to ameliorate sever preeclampsia.\n\nAhmed is the inaugural Executive Dean of Aston Medical School and Pro-Vice-Chancellor at Aston University. He holds the Chair of Vascular Biology and the 50th Anniversary Chair of Translational Medicine. In addition, he is the KAU Distinguished Adjunct Professor at King AbdulAziz University and an Honorary Professor at the Jilin University Hospital. His main area of research is preeclampsia, angiogenesis and gaseous signalling molecules. In addition, Professor Ahmed established and leads the Aston Medical Research Institute, a university-wide multidisciplinary translational research entity at Aston University.\n\nAsif Ahmed is also the founder and the Chairman of MirZyme Therapeutics, a biopharmaceutical to be the first spin out company from Aston Medical School, focused on maternal and child health.\n\nAhmed went to a local comprehensive Aylward School in North London and was subsequently educated at King's College London where he gained his undergraduate degree in Pharmacology. He was awarded a PhD for his work on platelet abnormalities in cardiopulmonary bypass surgery from University College London in 1989.\n\nFrom 1989-93 Professor Ahmed was a Postdoctoral Research Fellow at the University of Cambridge. From 1993-2010 he worked at The University of Birmingham being promoted to Professor of Reproductive Physiology in 1998. From 2009-2011 he was a Visiting Professor at Stanford University School of Medicine. Between 2010 and 2012 he held the Inaugural Gustav Born Chair of Vascular Biology and was appointed as the Assistant Principal for International Postdoctoral Training at the University of Edinburgh. Professor Ahmed joined Aston University as Pro-Vice-Chancellor for Health in October 2012. He was elected as a Fellow of the Royal Society of Biology in 2013.\n\nAhmed conceived the concept of Aston Medical School and led in its development. The opening of Aston Medical School makes Birmingham the only UK city outside London to have two medical schools. Professor Ahmed developed a new model of medical education in the UK, with a focus on social mobility and business acumen, delivered at low cost to the public purse.\nThis model was recognized and endorsed by the Minister for Higher Education at the time, The RT Hon David Willetts . Aston Medical School opened in June 2014 and was awarded approval to admit undergraduate medical students by the General Medical Council in 2017. Aston Medical School is the fifth school at Aston University and will admit its first cohort of undergraduate medical students in to its MBChB course in September 2018 . \n\nThe MBChB course has a unique business leadership component linked to medicine which will be delivered in conjunction with Aston Business School.\n\nThe ethos of widening participation is supported through the Sir Doug Ellis Pathway to Healthcare programme. The programme is named after Aston Villa FC Chairman Sir Doug Ellis who has financially supported the programme.\nIn 2015, Aston Medical School started to offer MSc, PhD and CPD courses.\n\nAhmed’s laboratory was amongst the first to signal the importance of vascular growth factors in pregnancy and pioneered the concept of angiogenic imbalance theory in preeclampsia in the mid-1990s.\n\nIn 2000, he discovered that the enzyme placental heme oxygenase (HO) which protects the human placenta against injury and went on to identify carbon monoxide (CO), the gaseous product of HO, as an inhibitor of anti-angiogenic proteins (soluble Flt-1 and soluble endoglin)\n\nSoluble Flt-1, the natural anti-VEGF factor in circulation, is increasingly recognized as a major factor responsible for the clinical signs of preeclampsia. Professor Ahmed identified soluble Flt-1 as the single most important molecule responsible for the angiogenic imbalance in preeclampsia by demonstrating that the removal of soluble Flt-1 from preeclamptic samples restored angiogenic balance which was later confirmed in vivo by others.\n\nThe identification that increasing HO activity could provide protection against preeclampsia formed the basis for the world’s first randomized controlled clinical trial on statins in pregnancy, StAmP Trial. As of 2017, under Ahmed's leadership Aston Medical School had secured nearly £10million of external funding.\n\nAhmed is a published poet and loves hiking.\n", "id": "56267867", "title": "Asif Ahmed (academic)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56325961", "text": "Ernest Madu\n\nDr. Ernest Madu (born February 18, 1960) is a nuclear cardiologist whose work focuses on providing affordable public healthcare in low-resource nations. As founder, chairman, and CEO of the Heart Institute of the Caribbean (HIC), Dr. Madu’s research concentrates on the management and health effects of globalization in susceptible populations. Dr. Richard Chazal, President of the American College of Cardiology, noted that Dr. Madu has made \"great contributions to the College and to the international cardiovascular community.\" While TED notes that “Dr. Madu’s research on noninvasive evaluation of coronary artery disease in obese individuals has become a standard evaluating tool” in the world of medicine. \n\nExtramural honors and awards include:\n\n", "id": "56325961", "title": "Ernest Madu"}
