{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27419285", "text": "Degeneracy (biology)\n\nWithin biological systems, degeneracy occurs when structurally dissimilar components/modules/pathways can perform similar functions (i.e. are effectively interchangeable) under certain conditions, but perform distinct functions in other conditions. Degeneracy is thus a relational property that requires comparing the behavior of two or more components. In particular, if degeneracy is present in a pair of components then there will exist conditions where the pair will appear functionally redundant but other conditions where they will appear functionally distinct.\n\nNote that this use of the term has practically no relevance to the questionably meaningful concept of evolutionarily degenerate populations that have lost ancestral functions.\n\nExamples of degeneracy are found in the genetic code, when many different nucleotide sequences encode the same polypeptide; in protein folding, when different polypeptides fold to be structurally and functionally equivalent; in protein functions, when overlapping binding functions and similar catalytic specificities are observed; in metabolism, when multiple, parallel biosynthetic and catabolic pathways may coexist.\nMore generally, degeneracy is observed in proteins of every functional class (e.g. enzymatic, structural, or regulatory), protein complex assemblies, ontogenesis, the nervous system, cell signalling (crosstalk) and numerous other biological contexts reviewed in.\n\nDegeneracy contributes to the robustness of biological traits through several mechanisms. Degenerate components compensate for one another under conditions where they are functionally redundant, thus providing robustness against component or pathway failure. Because degenerate components are somewhat different, they tend to harbor unique sensitivities so that a targeted attack such as a specific inhibitor is less likely to present a risk to all components at once. There are numerous biological examples where degeneracy contributes to robustness in this way. For instance, gene families can encode for diverse proteins with many distinctive roles yet sometimes these proteins can compensate for each other during lost or suppressed gene expression, as seen in the developmental roles of the adhesins gene family in Saccharomyces. Nutrients can be metabolized by distinct metabolic pathways that are effectively interchangeable for certain metabolites even though the total effects of each pathway are not identical. In cancer, therapies targeting the EGF receptor are thwarted by the co-activation of alternate receptor tyrosine kinases (RTK) that have partial functional overlap with the EGF receptor (and are therefore degenerate), but are not targeted by the same specific EGF receptor inhibitor. Other examples from various levels of biological organization can be found in.\n\nSeveral theoretical developments have outlined links between degeneracy and important biological measurements related to robustness, complexity, and evolvability. These include:\n\nCanalisation\n\nBecause there are many distinct types of systems that undergo heritable variation and selection (see Universal Darwinism), degeneracy has become a highly interdisciplinary topic. The following provides a brief roadmap to the application and study of degeneracy within different disciplines.\n\nAnimal Communication\n\nCultural Variation\n\nEcosystems\n\nEpigenetics\n\nHistory and philosophy of science \n\nSystems biology\n\nEvolution\n\nImmunology\n\nArtificial life, Computational intelligence\n\nBrain\n\nLinguistics\n\nOncology\n\nPeer Review\n\n\n", "id": "27419285", "title": "Degeneracy (biology)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50797822", "text": "Inclusive fitness in humans\n\nInclusive fitness in humans is the application of inclusive fitness theory to human social behaviour, relationships and cooperation. Inclusive fitness theory (and the related kin selection theory) are general theories in evolutionary biology that propose a method to understand the evolution of social behaviours in organisms. While various ideas related to these theories have been influential in the study of the social behaviour of non-human organisms, their application to human behaviour has been debated.\n\nInclusive fitness theory is broadly understood to describe a \"statistical\" criterion by which social traits can \"evolve\" to become widespread in a population of organisms. However, beyond this some scientists have interpreted the theory to make predictions about how the \"expression\" of social behavior is mediated in both humans and other animals – typically that genetic relatedness determines the expression of social behaviour. Other biologists and anthropologists maintain that beyond its statistical evolutionary relevance the theory does not necessarily imply that genetic relatedness \"per se\" determines the \"expression\" of social behavior in organisms. Instead, the expression of social behavior may be mediated by correlated conditions, such as shared location, shared rearing environment, familiarity or other contextual cues which correlate with shared genetic relatedness, thus meeting the statistical evolutionary criteria without being deterministic. While the former position still attracts controversy, the latter position has a better empirical fit with anthropological data about human kinship practices, and is accepted by cultural anthropologists.\n\nApplying evolutionary biology perspectives to humans and human society has often resulted in periods of controversy and debate, due to their apparent incompatibility with alternative perspectives about humanity. Examples of early controversies include the reactions to \"On the Origin of Species\", and the Scopes Monkey Trial. Examples of later controversies more directly connected with inclusive fitness theory and its use in sociobiology include physical confrontations at meetings of the Sociobiology Study Group and more often intellectual arguments such as Sahlins' 1976 book \"The use and abuse of biology\", Lewontin et al.'s 1984 \"Not in Our Genes\", and Kitcher's 1985 \"Vaulting Ambition:Sociobiology and the Quest for Human Nature\". Some of these later arguments were produced by other scientists, including biologists and anthropologists, against Wilson's 1975 book \"\", which was influenced by (though not necessarily endorsed by) Hamilton's work on inclusive fitness theory.\n\nA key debate in applying inclusive fitness theory to humans has been between biologists and anthropologists around the extent to which human kinship relationships (considered to be a large component of human solidarity and altruistic activity and practice) are necessarily based on or influenced by genetic relationships or blood-ties ('consanguinity'). The position of most social anthropologists is summarized by Sahlins (1976), that for humans \"the categories of 'near' and 'distant' [kin] vary independently of consanguinal distance and that these categories organize actual social practice\" (p. 112). Biologists wishing to apply the theory to humans directly disagree, arguing that \"the categories of 'near' and 'distant' do not 'vary independently of consanguinal distance', not in any society on earth.\" (Daly et al. 1997, p282).\n\nThis disagreement is central because of the way the association between blood ties/genetic relationships and altruism are conceptualized by many biologists. It is frequently understood by biologists that inclusive fitness theory makes predictions about \"how behaviour is mediated\" in both humans and other animals. For example, a recent experiment conducted on humans by the evolutionary psychologist Robin Dunbar and colleagues was, as they understood it, designed \"to test the prediction that altruistic behaviour is mediated by Hamilton's rule\" (inclusive fitness theory) and more specifically that \"If participants follow Hamilton's rule, investment (time for which the [altruistic] position was held) should increase with the recipient's relatedness to the participant. In effect, we tested whether investment flows differentially down channels of relatedness.\" From their results, they concluded that \"\"human altruistic behaviour is mediated by Hamilton's rule ... humans behave in such a way as to maximize inclusive fitness: they are more willing to benefit closer relatives than more distantly related individuals.\"\" (Madsen et al. 2007). This position continues to be rejected by social anthropologists as being incompatible with the large amount of ethnographic data on kinship and altruism that their discipline has collected over many decades, that demonstrates that in many human cultures, kinship relationships (accompanied by altruism) do not necessarily map closely onto genetic relationships\n\nWhilst the above understanding of inclusive fitness theory as necessarily making predictions about how human kinship and altruism is mediated is common amongst evolutionary psychologists, other biologists and anthropologists have argued that it is at best a limited (and at worst a mistaken) understanding of inclusive fitness theory. These scientists argue that the theory is better understood as simply describing an \"evolutionary\" criterion for the emergence of altruistic behaviour, which is explicitly statistical in character, not as predictive of \"proximate\" or \"mediating\" mechanisms of altruistic behaviour, which may not necessarily be determined by genetic relatedness (or blood ties) \"per se\". These alternative non-deterministic and non-reductionist understandings of inclusive fitness theory and human behavior have been argued to be compatible with anthropologists' decades of data on human kinship, and compatible with anthropologists' perspectives on human kinship. This position (e.g. nurture kinship) has been largely accepted by social anthropologists, whilst the former position (still held by evolutionary psychologists, see above) remains rejected by social anthropologists.\n\nInclusive fitness theory, first proposed by Bill Hamilton in the early 1960s, proposes a selective criterion for the potential evolution of social traits in organisms, where social behavior that is costly to an individual organism's survival and reproduction could nevertheless emerge under certain conditions. The key condition relates to the statistical likelihood that significant benefits of a social trait or behavior accrue to (the survival and reproduction of) other organisms whom also carry the social trait. Inclusive fitness theory is a general treatment of the statistical probabilities of social traits accruing to any other organisms likely to propagate a copy of the same social trait. Kin selection theory treats the narrower but more straightforward case of the benefits accruing to close genetic relatives (or what biologists call 'kin') who may also carry and propagate the trait. Under conditions where the social trait sufficiently correlates (or more properly, \"regresses\") with other likely bearers, a net overall increase in reproduction of the social trait in future generations can result.\n\nThe concept serves to explain how natural selection can perpetuate altruism. If there is an \"altruism gene\" (or complex of genes or heritable factors) that influence an organism's behavior in such a way that is helpful and protective of relatives and their offspring, this behavior can also increase the proportion of the altruism gene in the population, because relatives are likely to share genes with the altruist due to common descent. In formal terms, if such a complex of genes arises, Hamilton's rule (rb>c) specifies the selective criteria (in terms of relatedness (r), cost (c) benefit (b)) for such a trait to increase in frequency in the population (see Inclusive fitness for more details). Hamilton noted that inclusive fitness theory does not by itself predict that a given species will necessarily evolve such altruistic behaviors, since an opportunity or context for interaction between individuals is a more primary and necessary requirement in order for any social interaction to occur in the first place. As Hamilton put it, \"Altruistic or selfish acts are only possible when a suitable social object is available. In this sense behaviours are conditional from the start.\" (Hamilton 1987, 420). In other words, whilst inclusive fitness theory specifies a set of necessary criteria for the evolution of certain altruistic traits, it does not specify a sufficient condition for their evolution in any given species, since the typical ecology, demographics and life pattern of the species must also allow for social interactions between individuals to occur, before any potential elaboration of social traits can evolve in regard to those interactions.\n\nThe initial presentation of inclusive fitness theory (in the mid 1960s, see \"The Genetical Evolution of Social Behaviour\") focused on making the general mathematical case for the possibility of social evolution. However, since many field biologists mainly use theory as a guide to their observations and analysis of empirical phenomena, Hamilton also speculated about possible proximate behavioural mechanisms that might be observable in organisms whereby a social trait could effectively achieve this necessary statistical correlation between its likely bearers:\n\nHamilton here was suggesting two broad proximate mechanisms by which social traits might meet the criterion of correlation specified by the theory:\n\nKin recognition (active discrimination): if a social trait enables an organism to distinguish between different degrees of genetic relatedness when interacting in a mixed population, and to discriminate (positively) in performing social behaviours on the basis of detecting genetic relatedness, then the average relatedness of the recipients of altruism could be high enough to meet the criterion. In another section of the same paper (page 54) Hamilton considered whether 'supergenes' that identify copies of themselves in others might evolve to give more accurate information about genetic relatedness. He later (1987, see below) considered this to be wrong-headed and withdrew the suggestion.\n\nViscous populations (spatial cues): even indiscriminate altruism may achieve the correlation in 'viscous' populations where individuals have low rates of dispersal or short distances of dispersal from their home range (their location of birth). Here, social partners are typically genealogically closely related, and so altruism can flourish even in the absence of kin recognition and kin discrimination faculties – spatial proximity and circumstantial cues provide the necessary correlation.\n\nLewis Carroll expressed this in the scene in “Alice’s Adventures \nin Wonderland” when Alice is falling down a vertical shaft in the rabbit hole. It seemed to go on forever. She says “I wonder if I shall fall right through the earth! How funny it'll seem to come out among the people that walk with their heads downward! The Antipathies, I think — ” A pun on the word antipodes, meaning people who are opposite your feet. Carroll referred to the (now questioned) belief that we tend to disagree with people who live far away.\n\nThese alternatives had important effects on how field biologists understood the theory and what they looked for in the behavior of organisms. Within a few years biologists were looking for evidence that 'kin recognition' mechanisms might occur in organisms, assuming this was a necessary prediction of inclusive fitness theory, leading to a sub-field of 'kin recognition' research (\"see below and see\" Kin recognition).\n\nA common source of confusion around inclusive fitness theory is that Hamilton's early analysis included some inaccuracies, that, \"although corrected by him in later publications\", are often not fully understood by other researchers who attempt to apply inclusive fitness to understanding organisms' behaviour. For example, Hamilton had initially suggested that the statistical correlation in his formulation could be understood by a correlation coefficient of genetic relatedness, but quickly accepted George Price's correction that a general regression coefficient was the more relevant metric, and together they published corrections in 1970. A related confusion is the connection between inclusive fitness and multi-level selection, which are often incorrectly assumed to be mutually exclusive theories. The regression coefficient helps to clarify this connection:\n\nHamilton also later modified his thinking about likely mediating mechanisms whereby social traits achieve the necessary correlation with genetic relatedness. Specifically he corrected his earlier speculations that an innate ability (and 'supergenes') to recognise actual genetic relatedness was a likely mediating mechanism for kin altruism:\n\nThe point about inbreeding avoidance is significant, since the whole genome of sexual organisms benefits from avoiding close inbreeding; there is a different selection pressure at play compared to the selection pressure on social traits (see Kin recognition for more information).\n\nSince Hamiton's 1964 speculations about active discrimination mechanisms (above), other theorists such as Richard Dawkins had clarified that there would be negative selection pressure against mechanisms for genes to recognize copies of themselves in other individuals and discriminate socially between them on this basis. Dawkins used his 'Green beard' thought experiment, where a gene for social behaviour is imagined also to cause a distinctive phenotype that can be recognised by other carriers of the gene. Due to conflicting genetic similarity in the rest of the genome, there would be selection pressure for green-beard altruistic sacrifices to be suppressed via meitoic drive.\n\nHamilton's later clarifications often go unnoticed, and because of the long-standing assumption that kin selection requires innate powers of kin recognition, some theorists have later tried to clarify the position:\n\nThe assumption that 'kin selection requires kin discrimination' has obscured the more parsimonious possibility that spatial-cue-based mediation of social cooperation based on limited dispersal and shared developmental context are commonly found in many organisms that have been studied, including in social mammal species. As Hamilton pointed out, \"Altruistic or selfish acts are only possible when a suitable social object is available. In this sense behaviours are conditional from the start\" (Hamilton 1987, see above section). Since a reliable context of interaction between social actors is always a necessary condition for social traits to emerge, a reliable context of interaction is necessarily present to be leveraged by context-dependent cues to mediate social behaviours. Focus on mediating mechanisms of limited dispersal and reliable developmental context has allowed significant progress in applying kin selection and inclusive fitness theory to a wide variety of species, including humans, on the basis of cue-based mediation of social bonding and social behaviours (see below).\n\nIn mammals, as well as in other species, ecological niche and demographic conditions strongly shape typical contexts of interaction between individuals, including the frequency and circumstances surrounding the interactions between genetic relatives. Although mammals exist in a wide variety of ecological conditions and varying demographic arrangements, certain contexts of interaction between genetic relatives are nevertheless reliable enough for selection to act upon. New born mammals are often immobile and always totally dependent (socially dependent if you will) on their carer(s) for nursing with nutrient rich milk and for protection. This fundamental social dependence is a fact of life for all mammals, including humans. These conditions lead to a reliable spatial context in which there is a statistical association of replica genes between a reproductive female and her infant offspring (and has been evolutionary typical) for most mammal species. Beyond this natal context, extended possibilities for frequent interaction between related individuals are more variable and depend on group living vs. solitary living, mating patterns, duration of pre-maturity development, dispersal patterns, and more. For example, in group living primates with females remaining in their natal group for their entire lives, there will be lifelong opportunities for interactions between female individuals related through their mothers and grandmothers etc. These conditions also thus provide a spatial-context for cue-based mechanisms to mediate social behaviours.\n\nIn addition to the above examples, a wide variety of evidence from mammal species supports the finding that shared context and familiarity mediate social bonding, rather than genetic relatedness \"per se\". Cross-fostering studies (placing unrelated young in a shared developmental environment) strongly demonstrate that unrelated individuals bond and cooperate just as would normal littermates. The evidence therefore demonstrates that bonding and cooperation are mediated by proximity, shared context and familiarity, not via active recognition of genetic relatedness. This is problematic for those biologists who wish to claim that inclusive fitness theory predicts that social cooperation is \"mediated\" via genetic relatedness, rather than understanding the theory simply to state that social traits can \"evolve\" under conditions where there is \"statistical\" association of genetically related organisms. The former position sees the expression of cooperative behaviour as more or less deterministically caused by genetic relatedness, where the latter position does not. The distinction between cooperation mediated by shared context, and cooperation mediated by genetic relatedness \"per se\", has significant implications for whether inclusive fitness theory can be seen as compatible with the anthropological evidence on human social patterns or not. The \"shared context\" perspective is largely compatible, the \"genetic relatedness\" perspective is not (see below).\n\nThe debate about how to interpret the implications of Inclusive fitness theory for human social cooperation has paralleled some of the key misunderstandings outlined above. Initially, evolutionary biologists interested in humans wrongly assumed that in the human case, 'kin selection requires kin discrimination' along with their colleagues studying other species (see West et al., above). In other words, many biologists assumed that strong social bonds accompanied by altruism and cooperation in human societies (long studied by the anthropological field of Kinship) were necessarily built upon recognizing genetic relatedness (or 'blood ties'). This seemed to fit well with historical research in anthropology originating in the nineteenth century (see history of kinship) that often assumed that human kinship was built upon a recognition of shared blood ties.\n\nHowever, independently of the emergence of inclusive fitness theory, from 1960s onwards many anthropologists themselves had reexamined the balance of findings in their own ethnographic data and had begun to reject the notion that human kinship is 'caused by' blood ties (see Kinship). Anthropologists have gathered very extensive ethnographic data on human social patterns and behaviour over a century or more, from a wide spectrum of different cultural groups. The data demonstrates that many cultures do not consider 'blood ties' (in the genealogical sense) to underlie their close social relationships and kinship bonds. Instead social bonds are often considered to be based on location-based shared circumstances including living together (co-residence), sleeping close together, working together, sharing food (commensality) and other forms of shared life together. Comparative anthropologists have shown that these aspects of shared circumstances are a significant component of what influences kinship in most human cultures, notwithstanding whether or not 'blood ties' are necessarily present (see Nurture kinship, below).\n\nAlthough blood ties (and genetic relatedness) often correlate with kinship, just as in the case of mammals (above section), evidence from human societies suggests that it is not the genetic relatedness \"per se\" that is the mediating mechanism of social bonding and cooperation, instead it is the shared context (albeit typically consisting of genetic relatives) and the familiarity that arises from it, that mediate the social bonds. This implies that genetic relatedness is not the \"determining mechanism\" nor required for the formation of social bonds in kinship groups, or for the expression of altruism in humans, even if statistical correlations of genetic relatedness are an \"evolutionary criterion\" for the emergence of such social traits in biological organisms over evolutionary timescales. Understanding this distinction between the \"statistical role of genetic relatedness in the evolution of social traits\" and yet its \"lack of necessary determining role in mediating mechanisms of social bonding and the expression of altruism\" is key to inclusive fitness theory's proper application to human social behaviour (as well as to other mammals).\n\nCompatible with biologists' emphasis on familiarity and shared context mediating social bonds, the concept of nurture kinship in the anthropological study of human social relationships (kinship) highlights the extent to which such relationships are brought into being through the performance of various acts of sharing, acts of care and performance of nurture between individuals who live in close proximity. Additionally the concept highlights ethnographic findings that, in a wide swath of human societies, people understand, conceptualize and symbolize their relationships predominantly in terms of giving, receiving and sharing nurture. The concept stands in contrast to the earlier anthropological concepts of human kinship relations being fundamentally based on \"blood ties\", some other form of shared substance, or a proxy for these (as in fictive kinship), and the accompanying notion that people universally understand their social relationships predominantly in these terms.\n\nThe nurture kinship perspective on the ontology of social ties, and how people conceptualize them, has become stronger in the wake of David M. Schneider's influential \"Critique of the Study of Kinship\" and Holland's subsequent \"Social Bonding and Nurture Kinship: Compatibility between Cultural and Biological approaches\", demonstrating that as well as the ethnographic record, \"biological theory and evidence\" also more strongly support the \"nurture\" perspective than the \"blood\" perspective. Both Schneider and Holland argue that the earlier \"blood\" theory of kinship derived from an unwarranted extension of symbols and values from anthropologists' own cultures (see ethnocentrism).\n\n", "id": "50797822", "title": "Inclusive fitness in humans"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=167334", "text": "Adult\n\nBiologically, an adult is a human or other organism that has reached sexual maturity. In human context, the term \"adult\" additionally has meanings associated with social and legal concepts. In contrast to a \"minor\", a legal adult is a person who has attained the age of majority and is therefore regarded as independent, self-sufficient, and responsible.\nHuman adulthood encompasses psychological adult development. Definitions of adulthood are often inconsistent and contradictory; a person may be biologically an adult, and have adult behavior but still be treated as a child if they are under the legal age of majority. Conversely, one may legally be an adult but possess none of the maturity and responsibility that may define an\nadult character.\n\nIn different cultures there are events that relate passing from being a child to becoming an adult or coming of age. This often encompasses the passing a series of tests to demonstrate that a person is prepared for adulthood, or reaching a specified age, sometimes in conjunction with demonstrating preparation. Most modern societies determine legal adulthood based on reaching a legally specified age without requiring a demonstration of physical maturity or preparation for adulthood.\n\nHistorically and cross-culturally, adulthood has been determined primarily by the start of puberty (the appearance of secondary sex characteristics such as menstruation in women, ejaculation in men, and pubic hair in both sexes). In the past, a person usually moved from the status of child directly to the status of adult, often with this shift being marked by some type of coming-of-age test or ceremony.\n\nAfter the social construct of adolescence was created, adulthood split into two forms: \"biological adulthood\" and \"social adulthood.\" Thus, there are now two primary forms of adults: biological adults (people who have attained reproductive ability, are fertile, or who evidence secondary sex characteristics) and social adults (people who are recognized by their culture or law as being adults). Depending on the context, \"adult\" can indicate either definition.\n\nAlthough few or no established dictionaries provide a definition for the two word term biological adult, the first definition of adult in multiple dictionaries includes \"the stage of the life cycle of an animal after reproductive capacity has been attained\". Thus, the base definition of the word adult is the period beginning at physical sexual maturity, which occurs sometime after the onset of puberty. Although this is the primary definition of the base word \"adult\", the term is also frequently used to refer to social adults. The two-word term \"biological adult\" stresses or clarifies that the original definition, based on physical maturity, is being used.\n\nIn humans, puberty on average begins around 10-11 years of age for girls and 11-12 years of age for boys, though this will vary from person to person. For girls, puberty begins around 10 or 11 years of age and ends around age 16. Boys enter puberty later than girls - usually around 12 years of age and it lasts until around age 16 or 17 (Or in rare cases 18 and a half).\n\nLegally, \"adulthood\" typically means that one has reached the age of majority - when parents lose parenting rights and responsibilities regarding the person concerned. Depending on one's jurisdiction, the age of majority may or may not be set independently of and should not be confused with the minimum ages applicable to other activities, such as engaging in a contract, marriage, voting, having a job, serving in the military, buying/possessing firearms, driving, traveling abroad, involvement with alcoholic beverages, smoking, sexual activity, gambling, being a model or actor in pornography, running for President, etc. Admission of a young person to a place may be restricted because of danger for that person, concern that the place may lead the person to immoral behavior or because of the risk that the young person causes damage (for example, at an exhibition of fragile items).\n\nOne can distinguish the legality of acts of a young person, or of enabling a young person to carry out that act, by selling, renting out, showing, permitting entrance, allowing participation, etc. There may be distinction between commercially and socially enabling. Sometimes there is the requirement of supervision by a legal guardian, or just by an adult. Sometimes there is no requirement, but rather a recommendation.\n\nUsing the example of pornography, one can distinguish between:\n\nWith regard to films with violence, etc.:\n\nThe age of majority ranges internationally from ages 15 to 21, with 18 being the most common age. Some cultures in Africa define adulthood at age 13.\n\nIn most of the world, including most of the United States, parts of the United Kingdom (England, Northern Ireland, Wales), India and China, the legal adult age is 18 (historically 21) for most purposes, with some notable exceptions:\n\nAccording to Jewish tradition, adulthood is reached at age 13 (the minimal age of the Bar Mitzvah or Bat Mitzvah) for Jewish boys and girls; they are expected to demonstrate preparation for adulthood by learning the Torah and other Jewish practices. The Christian Bible and Jewish scripture contain no age requirement for adulthood or marrying, which includes engaging in sexual activity. \nThe 1983 Code of Canon Law states, \"A man before he has completed his sixteenth year of age, and likewise a woman before she has completed her fourteenth year of age, cannot enter a valid marriage\". According to \"The Disappearance of Childhood\" by Neil Postman, the Christian Church of the Middle Ages considered the age of accountability, when a person could be tried and even executed as an adult, to be age 7.\n", "id": "167334", "title": "Adult"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54046997", "text": "Circannual cycle\n\nA circannual cycle is a biological process that occurs in living creatures over the period of approximately one year. This cycle was first discovered by Ebo Gwinner and Canadian biologist Ted Pengelley. It is classified as an Infradian rhythm, which is biological process with a period longer than that of a circadian rhythm, less than one cycle per 28 hours. These processes continue even in artificial environments in which seasonal cues have been removed by scientists. The term circannual is Latin, circa meaning approximately and annual relating to one year. Chronobiology is the field of biology pertaining to periodic rhythms that occur in living organisms in response to external stimuli such as photoperiod.\n\nThe location of the physical circannual timer in organisms and how it works are almost entirely unknown.\n\nIn one study performed by Eberhard Gwinner, two species of birds were born in a controlled environment without ever being exposed to external stimuli. They were presented with a fixed Photoperiod of 10 hours of light and 14 hours of darkness each day. The birds were exposed to these conditions for eight years and consistently molted at the same time as they would have in the wild, indicating that this physiological cycle is innate rather than governed environmentally.\n\nResearchers Ted Pengelley and Ken Fisher studied the circannual clock in the golden-mantled ground squirrel. They exposed the squirrels to twelve hours of light and 12 hours of darkness and at a constant temperature for three years. Despite this constant cycle, they continued to hibernate once a year with each episode preceded by an increase in body weight and food consumption. During the first year, the squirrels began hibernation in late October. They started hibernating in Mid august and early April respectively for the following two years, displaying a circannual rhythm with a period of about 10 months.\n\nA classic example in insects is the varied carpet beetle. \n\nGenerating biological rhythms internally helps organisms anticipate important changes in the environment before they occur, thus providing the organisms with time to prepare and survive. For example, some plants have a very strict time frame in regards to blooming and preparing for spring. If they begin their preparations too early or too late they risk not being pollinated, competing with different species, or other factors that might affect their survival rate. Having a circannual cycle may keep them from making this mistake if a particular geographic region experiences a false spring, where the weather becomes exceptionally warm early for a short period of time before returning to winter temperatures.\n\nSimilarly, bird plumage and mammal fur change with the approach of winter, and is triggered by the shortening photoperiod of autumn. The circannual cycle can also be useful for animals that Migrate or Hibernate. Many animals' reproductive organs change in response to changes in photoperiod. Male gonads will grow during the onset of spring to promote reproduction among the species. These enlarged gonads would be nearly impossible to keep year round and would be inefficient for the species. Many female animals will only produce eggs during certain times of the year.\n\nChanging climate may unravel ecosystems in which different organisms use different internal calendars. Warming temperatures may lead to earlier blooms of flora in spring. For instance, one study performed by Menzel et al., analyzed 125,000 phenological records of 542 plant species in 21 European countries from 1971 to 2000 and found that 78% of all plants studied advanced in flowering, leafing, and fruiting while only three percent were significantly delayed. They determined that the average advance of spring and summer was 2.5 days per decade in Europe. Meanwhile, fauna may breed or migrate based on the length of day, and thus might arrive too late for critical food supplies they co-evolved with.\n\nFor example, the Parus major closely times the hatching of their chicks to the emergence of the protein-rich winter moth caterpillar, which in turn hatches to meet the budding of oaks. These birds are a single-brood bird, meaning they breed once a year with about nine chicks per brood. If the birds and caterpillars and buds all emerge at the right time, the caterpillars eat the new oak leaves and their population increases dramatically, and this hopefully will coincide with the arrival of the new chicks, allowing them to eat. But if plants, insects, and birds respond differently to the advance of spring or other phenology changes, the relationship may be altered.\n\nAs another example, studies of the Pied Flycatcher (ficedula hypoleuca) have shown that their spring migration timing is triggered by an internal circannual clock that is fine tuned to day length. These particular birds overwinter in dry tropical forest in Western Africa and breed in temperate forests in Europe, over 4,500 km away. From 1980-2000, temperatures at the time of arrival and the start of breeding have warmed significantly. They have advanced their mean laying date by ten days, but have not advanced the spring arrival on their breeding grounds because their migration behavior is triggered by photoperiod rather than temperature.\n\nIn short, even if each individual species can easily live with elevated temperatures, disruptions of phenology timing at ecosystem level may still imperil them.\n\nOne reason for the paucity of research on circannual cycles is the duration of required efforts. The ratio of the period length of a circannual cycle to the length of the productive life of a scientist makes this branch of chronobiology very difficult. It takes an entire year to get one data point which makes it difficult to really see how these cycles adjust in time. To put this into perspective, a two-week experiment for a circadian biologist would take fourteen years for a circannual researcher, in order to achieve the same level of data robustness for the conclusions.\n", "id": "54046997", "title": "Circannual cycle"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8634205", "text": "Jim Al-Khalili\n\nJameel Sadik Al-Khalili born 20 September 1962 is a British theoretical physicist, author and broadcaster. He is currently Professor of Theoretical Physics and Chair in the Public Engagement in Science at the University of Surrey. He is a regular broadcaster and presenter of science programmes on BBC radio and television, and is a frequent commentator about science in other British media.\n\nIn 2014, Al-Khalili was named as a RISE (Recognising Inspirational Scientists and Engineers) leader by the UK's Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC). He was President of the British Humanist Association between January 2013 and January 2016.\n\nAl-Khalili was born in Baghdad in 1962. His father was an Air Force engineer, and his mother was an English Librarian. Al-Khalili settled permanently in the UK in 1979. After completing his A-levels in 1982, he studied physics at the University of Surrey and graduated with a Bachelor of Science degree in 1986. He stayed on at Surrey to pursue a Doctor of Philosophy degree in nuclear reaction theory, which he obtained in 1989, rather than accepting a job offer from the National Physical Laboratory.\n\nIn 1989, Al-Khalili was awarded a Science and Engineering Research Council (SERC) postdoctoral fellowship at University College London, after which he returned to Surrey in 1991, first as a research assistant, then as a lecturer. In 1994, Al-Khalili was awarded an Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) Advanced Research Fellowship for five years, during which time he established himself as a leading expert on mathematical models of exotic atomic nuclei. He has published widely in his field.\n\nAl-Khalili is now a professor of physics at the University of Surrey, where he also holds a chair in the Public Engagement in Science. He has been a Trustee (2006-2012) and Vice President (2008-2011) of the British Science Association. He also held an EPSRC Senior Media Fellowship.\n\nAl-Khalili was awarded the Royal Society Michael Faraday Prize for science communication for 2007 and elected an Honorary Fellow of the British Association for the Advancement of Science.\n\nHe has been a Fellow of the Institute of Physics since 2000, when he also received the Institute's Public Awareness of Physics Award. He has lectured widely both in the UK and around the world, particularly for the British Council. He is currently a member of the British Council Science and Engineering Advisory Group, a member of the Royal Society Equality and Diversity Panel, an external examiner for the Open University Department of Physics and Astronomy, a member of the Editorial Board for the open access Journal PMC Physics A, and Associate Editor of Advanced Science Letters. He is also a member of the Advisory Committee for the Cheltenham Science Festival.\n\nIn 2007, he was a judge on the BBC Samuel Johnson Prize for non-fiction and has been a celebrity judge at the National Science & Engineering Competition Finals at The Big Bang Fair. He was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in the 2008 Birthday Honours. In 2013 he was awarded an Honorary Degree (DSc) from the University of London.\n\nAs a broadcaster, Al-Khalili is frequently on television and radio and also writes articles for the British press. In 2004, he co-presented the Channel 4 documentary \"The Riddle of Einstein's Brain\", produced by Icon Films. His big break as a presenter came in 2007 with \"Atom\", a three-part series on BBC Four about the history of our understanding of the atom and atomic physics. This was followed by a special archive edition of \"BBC Horizon\", \"The Big Bang\".\n\nIn early 2009, he presented the BBC Four three-part series \"Science and Islam\" about the leap in scientific knowledge that took place in the Islamic world between the 8th and 14th centuries. He has contributed to programmes ranging from \"Tomorrow's World\", BBC Four's \"Mind Games\", \"The South Bank Show\" to BBC One's \"Bang Goes the Theory\". In October 2011, he began a programme on famous contemporary scientists on Radio Four, called \"The Life Scientific\". The first of this series featured his interview with Sir Paul Nurse.\n\nIn 2004, Al-Khalili was chosen as one of twenty-one \"Faces of UK Science\" for an exhibition in London's National Portrait Gallery.\n\nIn 2010, Al-Khalili presented a feature on the \"Doctor Who\" DVD of \"The Time Monster\", entitled \"Between Now... and Now!\", discussing the science behind time travel in that particular story. He presented a three-part BBC Four series on the history of chemistry called \"\", which was nominated for a BAFTA award, as well as a documentary on chaos theory called \"The Secret Life of Chaos\". He is also one of several presenters on \"Genius of Britain\", a five-part series for Channel 4 shown in 2010, along with Prof. Stephen Hawking, Prof. Richard Dawkins, Sir James Dyson and Sir David Attenborough.\n\nAl-Khalili is a regular guest on BBC Radio 4's \"In Our Time\", presented by Melvyn Bragg. He has been a guest on \"Start The Week\" and the \"Today\" programme. In April, 2009, he presented a three-part series called \"The Secret Scientists\" for the BBC World Service. He was the \"Desert Island Discs\" guest on 14 February 2010.\n\nAl-Khalili also hosts a regular \"Jim meets...\" interview series at the University of Surrey, which is published on the university's YouTube channel. Guests have included Sir David Attenborough, Lord (Robert) Winston, Professor Brian Cox and Rowan Williams, Archbishop of Canterbury.\n\nIn 2011, Al-Khalili hosted a three-part documentary series on BBC Four entitled \"\".\n\nIn January 2012, Al-Khalili presented a Horizon special on BBC 2, which examined the latest scientific developments in the quest to discover the Higgs Boson, with preliminary results from the Large Hadron Collider experiment at CERN suggesting that the elusive particle does indeed exist. In October that same year, he started presenting \"The Life Scientific\" on BBC Radio Four, a programme in which celebrated living scientists are interviewed; the first was Sir Paul Nurse. He has since interviewed a series of notable scientists, including Richard Dawkins, James Lovelock, Steven Pinker, Martin Rees, Jocelyn Bell Burnell, Mark Walport and Tim Hunt.\n\nAl-Khalili has presented the following TV programmes.\n\nA list of Jim Al-Khalili's peer reviewed research papers can be found on Google Scholar and Scopus. His published books include:\n\nHis essays, chapters and other contributions include\n\n\nAl-Khalili lives in Southsea in Portsmouth with his wife Julie. They have a son and daughter. Al-Khalili describes himself as an atheist and a humanist, remarking, \"as the son of a Protestant Christian mother and a Shia Muslim father, I have nevertheless ended up without a religious bone in my body\". Al-Khalili has been a supporter of Leeds United F.C. since the Don Revie days of the early 1970s.\n\n", "id": "8634205", "title": "Jim Al-Khalili"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13537626", "text": "Quantum biology\n\nQuantum biology refers to applications of quantum mechanics and theoretical chemistry to biological objects and problems. Many biological processes involve the conversion of energy into forms that are usable for chemical transformations and are quantum mechanical in nature. Such processes involve chemical reactions, light absorption, formation of excited electronic states, transfer of excitation energy, and the transfer of electrons and protons (hydrogen ions) in chemical processes such as photosynthesis and cellular respiration. Quantum biology may use computations to model biological interactions in light of quantum mechanical effects. Quantum biology is concerned with the influence of non-trivial quantum phenomena, as opposed to the so-called trivial quantum phenomena present in all biology by reduction to fundamental physics.\n\nEarly pioneers of quantum physics saw applications of quantum mechanics in biological problems. Erwin Schrödinger's 1944 book \"What is Life?\" discussed applications of quantum mechanics in biology. Schrödinger introduced the idea of an \"aperiodic crystal\" that contained genetic information in its configuration of covalent chemical bonds. He further suggested that mutations are introduced by \"quantum leaps\". Other pioneers Niels Bohr, Pascual Jordan, and Max Delbruck argued that the quantum idea of complementarity was fundamental to the life sciences. In 1963, Per-Olov Löwdin published proton tunneling as another mechanism for DNA mutation. In his paper, he stated that there is a new field of study called \"quantum biology\".\n\nOrganisms that undergo photosynthesis initially absorb light energy through the process of electron excitation in an antenna. This antenna varies between organisms. Bacteria can use ring like structures as antennas, whereas plants and other organisms use chlorophyll pigments to absorb photons. This electron excitation creates a separation of charge in a reaction site that is later converted into chemical energy for the cell to use. However, this electron excitation must be transferred in an efficient and timely manner, before that energy is lost in fluorescence.\n\nVarious structures are responsible for transferring energy from the antennas to a reaction site. One of the most well studied is the FMO complex in green sulfur bacteria. FT electron spectroscopy studies show an efficiency of above 99% between the absorption of electrons and transfer to the reaction site with short lived intermediates. This high efficiency cannot be explained by classical mechanics such as a diffusion model.\n\nStudies published in 2010 claimed to identify electronic quantum coherence and entanglement between the excited states of different pigments in the light-harvesting stage of photosynthesis. However, critical follow-up studies question the interpretation of these results and assign the reported signatures of electronic quantum coherence to nuclear dynamics in the chromophores. There are a number of proposals as to how quantum coherence transfers the absorbed energy to the reaction site. According to one proposal, if each site within the complex feels its own environmental noise, then because of both quantum coherence and thermal environment, the electron will not remain in any local minimum but proceed to the reaction site. Another proposal is that the rate of quantum coherence combined with electron tunneling creates an energy sink that moves the electron to the reaction site quickly. Recent work indicates that symmetries present in the geometric arrangement of the complex may favor efficient energy transfer to the reaction center, in a way that resembles perfect state transfer in quantum networks. However, control experiments cast doubts on the interpretation that quantum effects last any longer than one hundred femtoseconds.\n\nVision relies on quantized energy in order to convert light signals to an action potential in a process called phototransduction. In phototransduction, a photon interacts with a chromophore in a light receptor. The chromophore absorbs the photon and undergoes photoisomerization. This change in structure induces a change in the structure of the photo receptor and resulting signal transduction pathways lead to a visual signal. However, the photoisomerization reaction occurs at a rapid rate, in under 200 femtoseconds, with high yield. Models suggest the use of quantum effects in shaping the ground state and excited state potentials in order to achieve this efficiency.\n\nEnzymes may use quantum tunneling to transfer electrons long distances. Tunneling refers to the ability of a small mass particle to travel through energy barriers. Studies show that long distance electron transfers between redox centers through quantum tunneling plays important roles in enzymatic activity of photosynthesis and cellular respiration. For example, studies show that long range electron tunneling on the order of 15–30 Å plays a role in redox reactions in enzymes of cellular respiration. Even though there are such large separations between redox sites within enzymes, electrons successfully transfer in a temperature independent and distance dependent manner. This suggests the ability of electrons to tunnel in physiological conditions. Further research is needed to determine whether this specific tunneling is also coherent.\n\nMagnetoreception refers to the ability of animals to navigate using the inclination of the magnetic field of the earth. A possible explanation for magnetoreception is the radical pair mechanism. The radical-pair mechanism is well-established in spin chemistry, and was speculated to apply to magnetoreception in 1978 by Schulten et al.. In 2000, cryptochrome was proposed as the \"magnetic molecule\", so to speak, that could harbor magnetically sensitive radical-pairs. Cryptochrome, a flavoprotein found in the eyes of European robins and other animal species, is the only protein known to form photoinduced radical-pairs in animals. The function of cryptochrome is diverse across species, however, the photoinduction of radical-pairs occurs by exposure to blue light, which excites an electron in a chromophore.\n\nNevertheless, in the lab, the direction of weak magnetic fields can affect radical-pair's reactivity, and therefore can \"catalyze\" the formation of chemical products. Whether this mechanism applies to magnetoreception and/or quantum biology, that is, whether earth's magnetic field \"catalyzes\" the formation of \"bio\"chemical products by the aid of entangled or non-entangled radical-pairs, is doubly undetermined. As to the former, researchers found evidence for the radical-pair mechanism of magnetoreception when European robins, cockroaches, and garden warblers, could no longer navigate when exposed to a radio frequency oscillating magnetic fields, which specially disturbs radical-pair chemistry. To empirically suggest the involvement of entanglement, an experiment would need to be devised that could disturb entangled radical-pairs without disturbing other radical-pairs, or vice versa, which would first need to be demonstrated in a laboratory setting before being applied to magnetoreception.\n\nOther examples of quantum phenomena in biological systems include olfaction, the conversion of chemical energy into motion, DNA mutation and brownian motors in many cellular processes.\n\n\n", "id": "13537626", "title": "Quantum biology"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3782801", "text": "Luca Turin\n\nLuca Turin (born 20 November 1953) is a biophysicist and writer with a long-standing interest in the sense of smell, perfumery, and the fragrance industry.\n\nTurin was born in Beirut, Lebanon on 20 November 1953 into an Italian-Argentinian family, and raised in France, Italy and Switzerland. His father was a UN diplomat, and his mother is a designer. Turin studied Physiology and Biophysics at University College London and earned his PhD in 1978. He worked at the CNRS from 1982-1992, and served as lecturer in Biophysics at University College London from 1992-2000.\n\nAfter leaving the CNRS, Turin first held a visiting research position at the National Institutes of Health in North Carolina before moving back to London, where he became a lecturer in biophysics at University College London. In 2001 Turin was hired as CTO of start-up company Flexitral, based in Chantilly, Virginia, to pursue rational odorant design based on his theories. In April 2010 he described this role in the past tense, and the company's domain name appears to have been surrendered.\n\nIn 2010, Turin was based at MIT, working on a project to develop an electronic nose based in part on his theories, financed by DARPA. In 2014 he moved to the Institute of Theoretical Physics at the University of Ulm where he is currently a Visiting Professor.\n\nA major prediction of Turin's vibration theory of olfaction is the isotope effect: that the normal and deuterated versions of a compound should smell different due to unique vibration frequencies, despite having the same shape. A 2001 study by Haffenden et al. showed humans able to distinguish benzaldehyde from its deuterated version.\n\nHowever, experimental tests published in Nature Neuroscience in 2004 by Keller and Vosshall failed to support this prediction, with human subjects unable to distinguish acetophenone and its deuterated counterpart. The study was accompanied by an editorial, which considered the work of Keller and Vosshall to be \"refutation of a theory that, while provocative, has almost no credence in scientific circles.\" It continued, \"The only reason for the authors to do the study, or for \"Nature Neuroscience\" to publish it, is the extraordinary -- and inappropriate -- degree of publicity that the theory has received from uncritical journalists.\" The journal also published a review of \"The Emperor of Scent\", calling Chandler Burr's book about Turin and his theory \"giddy and overwrought.\"\nHowever, tests with animals have shown fish and insects able to distinguish isotopes by smell. Biophysical simulations published in Physical Review Letters in 2007 suggest that Turin's proposal is viable from a physics standpoint.\n\nThe vibration theory received possible support from a 2004 paper published in the journal Organic Biomolecular Chemistry by Takane and Mitchell, which shows that odor descriptions in the olfaction literature correlate more strongly with vibrational frequency than with molecular shape.\n\nIn 2011, Turin and colleagues published a paper in PNAS showing drosophila fruit flies can distinguish between odorants and their deuterated counterparts. Tests on drosophila differ from human experiments by using an animal subject known to have a good sense of smell and free from psychological biases that may complicate human tests. Drosophila were trained to avoid the deuterated odorant in a deuterated/normal pair, indicating a difference in odor. Furthermore, drosophila trained to avoid one deuterated odorant also avoided other deuterated odorants, chemically unrelated, indicating that the deuterated bond itself had a distinct smell. The authors identified a vibrational frequency that could be responsible and found it close to one found in nitriles. When flies trained to avoid deuterated odorants were exposed to the nitrile and its non-nitrile counterpart, the flies also avoided the nitrile, consistent with the theory that fly olfaction detects molecular vibrations. \nTwo years later, in 2013, Turin and colleagues published a study in PLoS ONE showing that humans easily distinguish gas-chromatography-purified deuterated musk in double-blind tests. The team chose musks due to the high number of carbon-hydrogen bonds available for deuteration. They replicated the earlier results of Vosshall and Keller showing that humans cannot reliably distinguish between acetophenone and its deuterated counterpart, with 8 hydrogens, and showed that humans only begin to detect the isotope odor of the musks beginning at 14 deuteriums, or 50% deuteration. Because Turin's proposed mechanism is a biological method of inelastic electron tunnelling spectroscopy, which exploits a quantum effect, his theory of olfaction mechanism has been described as an example of quantum biology.\n\nIn response to Turin's 2013 paper, involving deuterated and undeuterated isotopomers of the musk cyclopentadecanone, Block et al. in a 2015 paper in PNAS report that the human musk-recognizing receptor, OR5AN1, identified using a heterologous olfactory receptor expression system and robustly responding to cyclopentadecanone and muscone (which has 30 hydrogens), fails to distinguish isotopomers of these compounds in vitro. Furthermore, the mouse (methylthio)methanethiol-recognizing receptor, MOR244-3, as well as other selected human and mouse olfactory receptors, responded similarly to normal, deuterated, and carbon-13 isotopomers of their respective ligands, paralleling results found with the musk receptor OR5AN1. Based on these findings, the authors conclude that the proposed vibration theory of olfaction does not apply to the human musk receptor OR5AN1, mouse thiol receptor MOR244-3, or other olfactory receptors examined. Additionally, theoretical analysis by the authors shows that the proposed electron transfer mechanism of the vibrational frequencies of odorants could be easily suppressed by quantum effects of nonodorant molecular vibrational modes. The authors conclude: “These and other concerns about electron transfer at olfactory receptors, together with our extensive experimental data, argue against the plausibility of the vibration theory.” In commenting on this work, Vosshall writes “In PNAS, Block et al…. shift the “shape vs. vibration” debate from olfactory psychophysics to the biophysics of the ORs themselves. The authors mount a sophisticated multidisciplinary attack on the central tenets of the vibration theory using synthetic organic chemistry, heterologous expression of olfactory receptors, and theoretical considerations to find no evidence to support the vibration theory of smell.\" While Turin comments that Block used \"cells in a dish rather than within whole organisms\" and that \"expressing an olfactory receptor in human embryonic kidney cells doesn't adequately reconstitute the complex nature of olfaction...\", Vosshall responds \"Embryonic kidney cells are not identical to the cells in the nose .. but if you are looking at receptors, it's the best system in the world.\" In a Letter to the Editor of PNAS, Turin et al. raise concerns about Block et al. and Block et al. respond.\n\nIn 1988, Turin began work at the lab led by neuroscience researcher Henri Korn at the Pasteur Institute. There, Turin and his colleague Nicole Ropert reported to their superiors that they believed some of Korn's research on neurotransmitters was based on fabricated results. After Turin made a formal request that the CNRS investigate the allegations, he was told to find work outside France; Ropert was also asked to leave.\n\nKorn was awarded the prestigious Richard Lounsbery Award in 1992 and became a member of the National Academy of Sciences in the U.S. and the French Academy of Sciences. Then in 2007, re-analysis of Korn's data by in the Journal of Neurophysiology showed serious anomalies that suggested the results were indeed fabricated.\n\nTurin is the author of the book \"The Secret of Scent\" (2006), which details the history and science of his theory of olfaction, an acclaimed critical guide to perfume in French, \"Parfums: Le Guide\", with two editions in 1992 and 1994, and is co-author of the English-language books \"Perfumes: The A-Z Guide\" (2008) and \"The Little Book of Perfumes\" (2011). He is also the subject of the 2002 book \"The Emperor of Scent\" by Chandler Burr and the 1995 BBC Horizons documentary \"A Code in the Nose.\"\n\nSince 2003, Turin has also written a regular column on perfume, \"Duftnote,\" for \"NZZ Folio\", the German-language monthly magazine of Swiss newspaper Neue Zürcher Zeitung. The column is also published in English on the magazine's website.\n\nIn 2001 and 2004, Turin won the Prix Jasmin, the highest honor for perfume writing in France. He won the Jasmine Prize in the UK in 2009.\n\n\n", "id": "3782801", "title": "Luca Turin"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1674555", "text": "Vibration theory of olfaction\n\nThe Vibration theory of smell proposes that a molecule's smell character is due to its vibrational frequency in the infrared range. This controversial theory is an alternative to the more widely accepted shape theory of olfaction, which proposes that a molecule's smell character is due to its molecular size, molecular shape and functional groups.\n\nThe current vibration theory has recently been called the \"swipe card\" model, in contrast with \"lock and key\" models based on shape theory. As proposed by Luca Turin, the odorant molecule must first fit in the receptor's binding site. Then it must have a vibrational energy mode compatible with the difference in energies between two energy levels on the receptor, so electrons can travel through the molecule via inelastic electron tunneling, triggering the signal transduction pathway. The vibration theory is discussed in a popular but controversial book by Chandler Burr.\n\nThe odor character is encoded in the ratio of activities of receptors tuned to different vibration frequencies, in the same way that color is encoded in the ratio of activities of cone cell receptors tuned to different frequencies of light. An important difference, though, is that the odorant has to be able to become resident in the receptor for a response to be generated. The time an odorant resides in a receptor depends on how strongly it binds, which in turn determines the strength of the response; the odor intensity is thus governed by a similar mechanism to the \"lock and key\" model. For a pure vibrational theory, the differing odors of enantiomers, which possess identical vibrations, cannot be explained. However, once the link between receptor response and duration of the residence of the odorant in the receptor is recognised, differences in odor between enantiomers can be understood: molecules with different handedness may spend different amounts of time in a given receptor, and so initiate responses of different intensities.\n\nSeeing as there are some aroma molecules of different shapes that smell the same (eg. benzaldehyde, that gives the same scent to both almonds and/or cyanide), the shape \"lock and key\" model is not quite sufficient to explain what is going on. Experiments with olfaction, taking quantum mechanics into consideration, suggest that ultimately both theories might work in harmony - first the scent molecules need to fit, as in the molecular shape \"lock and key\" model, but then the molecular vibrations of the chemical/atom bonds take over. So in essence your sense of smell could be much more like your sense of hearing, where your nose could be 'listening' to the acoustic/vibrational bonds of aroma molecules. \n\nSome studies support vibration theory while others challenge its findings.\n\nThe theory was first proposed by Malcolm Dyson in 1928 and expanded by Robert H. Wright in 1954, after which it was largely abandoned in favor of the competing shape theory. A 1996 paper by Luca Turin revived the theory by proposing a mechanism, speculating that the G-protein-coupled receptors discovered by Linda Buck and Richard Axel were actually measuring molecular vibrations using inelastic electron tunneling as Turin claimed, rather than responding to molecular keys fitting molecular locks, working by shape alone. In 2007 a \"Physical Review Letters\" paper by Marshall Stoneham and colleagues at University College London and Imperial College London showed that Turin's proposed mechanism was consistent with known physics and coined the expression \"swipe card model\" to describe it. A PNAS paper in 2011 by Turin, Efthimios Skoulakis, and colleagues at MIT and the Alexander Fleming Biomedical Sciences Research Center reported fly behavioral experiments consistent with a vibrational theory of smell. The theory remains controversial.\n\nA major prediction of Turin's theory is the isotope effect: that the normal and deuterated versions of a compound should smell different, although they have the same shape. A 2001 study by Haffenden et al. showed humans able to distinguish benzaldehyde from its deuterated version. However, this study has been criticized for lacking double-blind controls to eliminate bias and because it used an anomalous version of the duo-trio test. In addition, tests with animals have shown fish and insects able to distinguish isotopes by smell.\n\nIt should be noted, however, that deuteration changes the heats of adsorption and the boiling and freezing points of molecules (boiling points: 100.0 °C for HO vs. 101.42 °C for DO; melting points: 0.0 °C for HO, 3.82 °C for DO), p\"K\" (i.e., dissociation constant: 9.71×10 for HO vs. 1.95×10 for DO, cf. Heavy water) and the strength of hydrogen bonding. Such isotope effects are exceedingly common, and so it is well known that deuterium substitution will indeed change the binding constants of molecules to protein receptors. Any binding interaction of an odorant molecule with an olfactory receptor will therefore be likely to show some isotope effect upon deuteration, and the observation of an isotope effect in no way argues exclusively for a vibrational theory of olfaction.\n\nA study published in 2011 by Franco, Turin, Mershin and Skoulakis shows both that flies can smell deuterium, and that to flies, a carbon-deuterium bond smells like a nitrile, which has a similar vibration. The study reports that drosophila melanogaster (fruit fly), which is ordinarily attracted to acetophenone, spontaneously dislikes deuterated acetophenone. This dislike increases with the number of deuteriums. (Flies genetically altered to lack smell receptors could not tell the difference.) Flies could also be trained by electric shocks either to avoid the deuterated molecule or to prefer it to the normal one. When these trained flies were then presented with a completely new and unrelated choice of normal vs. deuterated odorants, they avoided or preferred deuterium as with the previous pair. This suggested that flies were able to smell deuterium regardless of the rest of the molecule. To determine whether this deuterium smell was actually due to vibrations of the carbon-deuterium (C-D) bond or to some unforeseen effect of isotopes, the researchers looked to nitriles, which have a similar vibration to the C-D bond. Flies trained to avoid deuterium and asked to choose between a nitrile and its non-nitrile counterpart did avoid the nitrile, lending support to the idea that the flies are smelling vibrations. Further isotope smell studies are under way in fruit flies and dogs.\n\nCarvone presented a perplexing situation to vibration theory. Carvone has two isomers, which have identical vibrations, yet one smells like mint and the other like caraway (for which the compound is named).\n\nAn experiment by Turin filmed by the 1995 BBC Horizon documentary \"A Code in the Nose\" consisted of mixing the mint isomer with butanone, on the theory that the shape of the G-protein-coupled receptor prevented the carbonyl group in the mint isomer from being detected by the \"biological spectroscope\". The experiment succeeded with the trained perfumers used as subjects, who perceived that a mixture of 60% butanone and 40% mint carvone smelled like caraway.\n\nAccording to Turin's original paper in the journal \"Chemical Senses\", the well documented smell of borane compounds is intensely sulfurous, though these molecules contain no sulfur. He proposes to explain this by the similarity in frequency between the vibration of the B-H bond and the S-H bond.\n\nBiophysical simulations published in \"Physical Review Letters\" in 2006 suggest that Turin's proposal is viable from a physics standpoint. However, Block et al. in their 2015 paper in \"Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences\" indicate that their theoretical analysis shows that \"the proposed electron transfer mechanism of the vibrational frequencies of odorants could be easily suppressed by quantum effects of nonodorant molecular vibrational modes\".\n\nA 2004 paper published in the journal \"Organic Biomolecular Chemistry\" by Takane and Mitchell shows that odor descriptions in the olfaction literature correlate with EVA descriptors, which loosely correspond to the vibrational spectrum, better than with descriptors based on the two dimensional connectivity of the molecule. The study did not consider molecular shape.\n\nTurin points out that traditional lock-and-key receptor interactions deal with agonists, which increase the receptor's time spent in the active state, and antagonists, which increase the time spent in the inactive state. In other words, some ligands tend to turn the receptor on and some tend to turn it off. As an argument against the traditional lock-and-key theory of smell, no olfactory antagonists have yet been found until recently.\n\nIn 2004, a Japanese research group published that an oxidation product of isoeugenol is able to antagonize, or prevent, mice olfactory receptor response to isoeugenol.\n\n\nThree predictions by Luca Turin on the nature of smell, using concepts of vibration theory, were addressed by experimental tests published in Nature Neuroscience in 2004 by Vosshall and Keller. The study failed to support the prediction that isotopes should smell different, with untrained human subjects unable to distinguish acetophenone from its deuterated counterpart. This study also pointed to experimental design flaws in the earlier study by Haffenden. In addition, Turin's description of the odor of long-chain aldehydes as alternately (1) dominantly waxy and faintly citrus and (2) dominantly citrus and faintly waxy was not supported by tests on untrained subjects, despite anecdotal support from fragrance industry professionals who work regularly with these materials. Vosshall and Keller also presented a mixture of guaiacol and benzaldehyde to subjects, to test Turin's theory that the mixture should smell of vanillin. Vosshall and Keller's data did not support Turin's prediction. However, Vosshall says these tests do not disprove the vibration theory.\n\nIn response to the 2011 PNAS study on flies, Vosshall acknowledged that flies could smell isotopes but called the conclusion that smell was based on vibrations an \"overinterpretation\" and expressed skepticism about using flies to test a mechanism originally ascribed to human receptors. For the theory to be confirmed, Vosshall stated there must be further studies on mammalian receptors. Bill Hansson, an insect olfaction specialist, raised the question of whether deuterium could affect hydrogen bonds between the odorant and receptor.\n\nIn 2013, Turin and coworkers confirmed Vosshall and Keller's experiments showing that even trained human subjects were unable to distinguish acetophenone from its deuterated counterpart. At the same time Turin and coworkers reported that human volunteers were able to distinguish cyclopentadecanone from its fully deuterated analog. To account for the different results seen with acetophenone and cyclopentadecanone, Turin and coworkers assert that \"there must be many C-H bonds before they are detectable by smell. In contrast to acetophenone which contains only 8 hydrogens, cyclopentadecanone has 28. This results in more than 3 times the number of vibrational modes involving hydrogens than in acetophenone, and this is likely essential for detecting the difference between isotopomers.\" Turin and coworkers provide no quantum mechanical justification for this latter assertion.\n\nVosshall, in commenting on Turin's work, notes that \"the olfactory membranes are loaded with enzymes that can metabolise odorants, changing their chemical identity and perceived odour. Deuterated molecules would be poor substrates for such enzymes, leading to a chemical difference in what the subjects are testing. Ultimately, any attempt to prove the vibrational theory of olfaction should concentrate on actual mechanisms at the level of the receptor, not on indirect psychophysical testing.\" Richard Axel co-recipient of the 2004 Nobel prize for physiology for his work on olfaction, expresses a similar sentiment, indicating that Turin's work \"would not resolve the debate – only a microscopic look at the receptors in the nose would finally show what is at work. Until somebody really sits down and seriously addresses the mechanism and not inferences from the mechanism... it doesn't seem a useful endeavour to use behavioural responses as an argument\".\n\nIn response to the 2013 paper on cyclopentadecanone, Block et al. report that the human musk-recognizing receptor, OR5AN1, identified using a heterologous olfactory receptor expression system and robustly responding to cyclopentadecanone and muscone (which has 30 hydrogens), fails to distinguish isotopomers of these compounds in vitro. Furthermore, the mouse (methylthio)methanethiol-recognizing receptor, MOR244-3, as well as other selected human and mouse olfactory receptors, responded similarly to normal, deuterated, and carbon-13 isotopomers of their respective ligands, paralleling results found with the musk receptor OR5AN1. Based on these findings, the authors conclude that the proposed vibration theory does not apply to the human musk receptor OR5AN1, mouse thiol receptor MOR244-3, or other olfactory receptors examined. Additionally, theoretical analysis by the authors shows that the proposed electron transfer mechanism of the vibrational frequencies of odorants could be easily suppressed by quantum effects of nonodorant molecular vibrational modes. The authors conclude: \"These and other concerns about electron transfer at olfactory receptors, together with our extensive experimental data, argue against the plausibility of the vibration theory.\"\n\nIn commenting on this work, Vosshall writes \"In PNAS, Block et al... shift the \"shape vs. vibration\" debate from olfactory psychophysics to the biophysics of the ORs themselves. The authors mount a sophisticated multidisciplinary attack on the central tenets of the vibration theory using synthetic organic chemistry, heterologous expression of olfactory receptors, and theoretical considerations to find no evidence to support the vibration theory of smell.\" While Turin comments that Block used \"cells in a dish rather than within whole organisms\" and that \"expressing an olfactory receptor in human embryonic kidney cells doesn't adequately reconstitute the complex nature of olfaction...\", Vosshall responds \"Embryonic kidney cells are not identical to the cells in the nose ... but if you are looking at receptors, it's the best system in the world.\" In a Letter to the Editor of PNAS, Turin et al. raise concerns about Block et al. and Block et al. respond.\n\nRecently, Saberi and Allaei have suggested that a functional relationship exists between molecular volume and the olfactory neural response. The molecular volume is an important factor, but it is not the only factor that determines the response of ORNs. The binding affinity of an odorant-receptor pair is affected by their relative sizes. The maximum affinity can be attained when the molecular volume of an odorant matches the volume of the binding pocket.<ref name=\"10.1101/013516\"></ref>\n\n", "id": "1674555", "title": "Vibration theory of olfaction"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9942", "text": "Erwin Schrödinger\n\nErwin Rudolf Josef Alexander Schrödinger (; ; 12 August 1887 – 4 January 1961), sometimes written as ' or ', was a Nobel Prize-winning Austrian physicist who developed a number of fundamental results in the field of quantum theory, which formed the basis of wave mechanics: he formulated the wave equation (stationary and time-dependent Schrödinger equation) and revealed the identity of his development of the formalism and matrix mechanics. Schrödinger proposed an original interpretation of the physical meaning of the wave function.\n\nIn addition, he was the author of many works in various fields of physics: statistical mechanics and thermodynamics, physics of dielectrics, colour theory, electrodynamics, general relativity, and cosmology, and he made several attempts to construct a unified field theory. In his book \"What Is Life?\" Schrödinger addressed the problems of genetics, looking at the phenomenon of life from the point of view of physics. He paid great attention to the philosophical aspects of science, ancient and oriental philosophical concepts, ethics, and religion. He also wrote on philosophy and theoretical biology. He is also known for his \"Schrödinger's cat\" thought-experiment.\n\nOn 12 August 1887, Schrödinger was born in , Vienna, Austria, to (cerecloth producer, botanist) and Georgine Emilia Brenda Schrödinger (née Bauer) (daughter of , Professor of Chemistry, Technische Hochschule Vienna). He was their only child.\n\nHis mother was of half Austrian and half English descent; his father was Catholic and his mother was Lutheran. Despite being raised in a religious household as a Lutheran, he was an atheist. However, he had strong interests in Eastern religions, pantheism and used religious symbolism in his works. He also believed his scientific work was an approach to the godhead, albeit in a metaphorical sense.\n\nHe was also able to learn English outside of school, as his maternal grandmother was British. Between 1906 and 1910 Schrödinger studied in Vienna under Franz S. Exner (1849–1926) and Friedrich Hasenöhrl (1874–1915). He also conducted experimental work with Karl Wilhelm Friedrich \"Fritz\" Kohlrausch.\n\nIn 1911, Schrödinger became an assistant to Exner. At an early age, Schrödinger was strongly influenced by Arthur Schopenhauer. As a result of his extensive reading of Schopenhauer's works, he became deeply interested throughout his life in colour theory and philosophy. In his lecture \"Mind and Matter\", he said that \"The world extended in space and time is but our representation.\" This is a repetition of the first words of Schopenhauer's main work.\n\nIn 1914 Erwin Schrödinger achieved Habilitation (\"venia legendi\"). Between 1914 and 1918 he participated in war work as a commissioned officer in the Austrian fortress artillery (Gorizia, Duino, Sistiana, Prosecco, Vienna). In 1920 he became the assistant to Max Wien, in Jena, and in September 1920 he attained the position of ao. Prof. (\"ausserordentlicher Professor\"), roughly equivalent to Reader (UK) or associate professor (US), in Stuttgart. In 1921, he became o. Prof. (\"ordentlicher Professor\", i.e. full professor), in Breslau (now Wrocław, Poland).\n\nIn 1921, he moved to the University of Zürich. In 1927, he succeeded Max Planck at the Friedrich Wilhelm University in Berlin. In 1934, however, Schrödinger decided to leave Germany; he disliked the Nazis' anti-semitism. He became a Fellow of Magdalen College at the University of Oxford. Soon after he arrived, he received the Nobel Prize together with Paul Dirac. His position at Oxford did not work out well; his unconventional domestic arrangements, sharing living quarters with two women was not met with acceptance. In 1934, Schrödinger lectured at Princeton University; he was offered a permanent position there, but did not accept it. Again, his wish to set up house with his wife and his mistress may have created a problem. He had the prospect of a position at the University of Edinburgh but visa delays occurred, and in the end he took up a position at the University of Graz in Austria in 1936. He had also accepted the offer of chair position at Department of Physics, Allahabad University in India.\n\nIn the midst of these tenure issues in 1935, after extensive correspondence with Albert Einstein, he proposed what is now called the Schrödinger's cat thought experiment.\n\nIn 1938, after the Anschluss, Schrödinger had problems because of his flight from Germany in 1933 and his known opposition to Nazism. He issued a statement recanting this opposition (he later regretted doing so and explained the reason to Einstein). However, this did not fully appease the new dispensation and the University of Graz dismissed him from his job for political unreliability. He suffered harassment and received instructions not to leave the country, but he and his wife fled to Italy. From there, he went to visiting positions in Oxford and Ghent University.\nIn the same year he received a personal invitation from Ireland's Taoiseach, Éamon de Valera, to reside in Ireland and agree to help establish an Institute for Advanced Studies in Dublin. He moved to Clontarf, Dublin, became the Director of the School for Theoretical Physics in 1940 and remained there for 17 years. He became a naturalized Irish citizen in 1948, but retained his Austrian citizenship. He wrote about 50 further publications on various topics, including his explorations of unified field theory.\n\nIn 1944, he wrote \"What Is Life?\", which contains a discussion of negentropy and the concept of a complex molecule with the genetic code for living organisms. According to James D. Watson's memoir, \"DNA, the Secret of Life\", Schrödinger's book gave Watson the inspiration to research the gene, which led to the discovery of the DNA double helix structure in 1953. Similarly, Francis Crick, in his autobiographical book \"What Mad Pursuit\", described how he was influenced by Schrödinger's speculations about how genetic information might be stored in molecules.\n\nSchrödinger stayed in Dublin until retiring in 1955. He had a lifelong interest in the Vedanta philosophy of Hinduism, which influenced his speculations at the close of \"What Is Life?\" about the possibility that individual consciousness is only a manifestation of a unitary consciousness pervading the universe. A manuscript \"Fragment From An Unpublished Dialogue of Galileo\" from this time recently resurfaced at The King's Hospital boarding school, Dublin after it was written for the School's 1955 edition of their Blue Coat to celebrate his leaving of Dublin to take up his appointment as Chair of Physics at the University of Vienna.\n\nIn 1956, he returned to Vienna (chair \"ad personam\"). At an important lecture during the World Energy Conference he refused to speak on nuclear energy because of his skepticism about it and gave a philosophical lecture instead. During this period Schrödinger turned from mainstream quantum mechanics' definition of wave–particle duality and promoted the wave idea alone, causing much controversy.\n\nOn 6 April 1920, Schrödinger married Annemarie (Anny) Bertel. Schrödinger suffered from tuberculosis and several times in the 1920s stayed at a sanatorium in Arosa. It was there that he formulated his wave equation.\nAs has been noted above, Schrödinger had an unconventional personal life. When he migrated to Ireland in 1938, he obtained visas for himself, his wife and also another woman, Mrs. Hilde March. March was the wife of an Austrian colleague and Schrödinger had fathered a daughter with her in 1934. Schrödinger wrote personally to the Taoiseach, Éamon de Valera to obtain the visa for Mrs. March. In October 1939 the \"ménage à trois\" duly took up residence in Dublin. Schrödinger fathered two further daughters by two different women during his time in Ireland. His grandson, Professor Terry Rudolph, follows in Schrödinger's footsteps as a quantum physicist who teaches at Imperial College London.\nOn 4 January 1961, Schrödinger died of tuberculosis, aged 73, in Vienna. He left Anny a widow, and was buried in Alpbach, Austria, in a Catholic cemetery. Although he was not Catholic, the priest in charge of the cemetery permitted the burial after learning Schrödinger was a member of the Pontifical Academy of Sciences. His wife, Anny (born 3 December 1896) died on 3 October 1965.\n\nEarly in his life, Schrödinger experimented in the fields of electrical engineering, atmospheric electricity, and atmospheric radioactivity, but he usually worked with his former teacher Franz Exner. He also studied vibrational theory, the theory of Brownian movement, and mathematical statistics. In 1912, at the request of the editors of the \"Handbook of Electricity and Magnetism\", Schrödinger wrote an article titled \"Dieelectrism\". That same year, Schrödinger gave a theoretical estimate of the probable height distribution of radioactive substances, which is required to explain the observed radioactivity of the atmosphere, and in August 1913 executed several experiments in Zeehame that confirmed his theoretical estimate and those of Victor Franz Hess. For this work, Schrödinger was awarded the 1920 Haitinger Prize (Haitinger-Preis) of the Austrian Academy of Sciences. Other experimental studies conducted by the young researcher in 1914 were checking formulas for capillary pressure in gas bubbles and the study of the properties of soft beta-radiation appearing in the fall of gamma rays on the surface of metal. The last work he performed together with his friend Fritz Kohlrausch. In 1919, Schrödinger performed his last physical experiment on coherent light and subsequently focused on theoretical studies.\n\nIn the first years of his career Schrödinger became acquainted with the ideas of quantum theory, developed in the works of Max Planck, Albert Einstein, Niels Bohr, Arnold Sommerfeld, and others. This knowledge helped him work on some problems in theoretical physics, but the Austrian scientist at the time was not yet ready to part with the traditional methods of classical physics.\n\nThe first publications of Schrödinger about atomic theory and the theory of spectra began to emerge only from the beginning of the 1920s, after his personal acquaintance with Sommerfeld and Wolfgang Pauli and his move to Germany. In January 1921, Schrödinger finished his first article on this subject, about the framework of the Bohr-Sommerfeld effect of the interaction of electrons on some features of the spectra of the alkali metals. Of particular interest to him was the introduction of relativistic considerations in quantum theory. In autumn 1922 he analyzed the electron orbits in an atom from a geometric point of view, using methods developed by the mathematician Hermann Weyl (1885–1955). This work, in which it was shown that quantum orbits are associated with certain geometric properties, was an important step in predicting some of the features of wave mechanics. Earlier in the same year he created the Schrödinger equation of the relativistic Doppler effect for spectral lines, based on the hypothesis of light quanta and considerations of energy and momentum. He liked the idea of his teacher Exner on the statistical nature of the conservation laws, so he enthusiastically embraced the articles of Bohr, Kramers, and Slater, which suggested the possibility of violation of these laws in individual atomic processes (for example, in the process of emission of radiation). Although the experiments of Hans Geiger and Walther Bothe soon cast doubt on this, the idea of energy as a statistical concept was a lifelong attraction for Schrödinger and he discussed it in some reports and publications.\n\nIn January 1926, Schrödinger published in \"Annalen der Physik\" the paper \"\" (Quantization as an Eigenvalue Problem) on wave mechanics and presented what is now known as the Schrödinger equation. In this paper, he gave a \"derivation\" of the wave equation for time-independent systems and showed that it gave the correct energy eigenvalues for a hydrogen-like atom. This paper has been universally celebrated as one of the most important achievements of the twentieth century and created a revolution in most areas of quantum mechanics and indeed of all physics and chemistry. A second paper was submitted just four weeks later that solved the quantum harmonic oscillator, rigid rotor, and diatomic molecule problems and gave a new derivation of the Schrödinger equation. A third paper, published in May, showed the equivalence of his approach to that of Heisenberg and gave the treatment of the Stark effect. A fourth paper in this series showed how to treat problems in which the system changes with time, as in scattering problems. In this paper he introduced a complex solution to the Wave equation in order to prevent the occurrence of fourth and sixth order differential equations. (This was arguably the moment when quantum mechanics switched from real to complex numbers.) When he introduced complex numbers in order to lower the order of the differential equations, something magical happened, and all of wave mechanics was at his feet. (He eventually reduced the order to one.) These papers were his central achievement and were at once recognized as having great significance by the physics community.\n\nSchrödinger was not entirely comfortable with the implications of quantum theory. Schrödinger wrote about the probability interpretation of quantum mechanics, saying: \"I don't like it, and I'm sorry I ever had anything to do with it.\"\n\nFollowing his work on quantum mechanics, Schrödinger devoted considerable effort to working on a Unified Field Theory that would unite gravity, electromagnetism, and nuclear forces within the basic framework of General Relativity, doing the work with an extended correspondence with Albert Einstein. In 1947, he announced a result, \"Affine Field Theory,\" in a talk at the Royal Irish Academy, but the announcement was criticized by Einstein as \"preliminary\" and failed to lead to the desired unified theory. Following the failure of his attempt at unification, Schrödinger gave up his work on unification and turned to other topics.\n\nSchrödinger had a strong interest in psychology, in particular colour perception and colorimetry (German: \"\"). He spent quite a few years of his life working on these questions and published a series of papers in this area:\n\nHis work on the psychology of color perception follows the step of Newton, Maxwell and von Helmholtz in the same area. Some of these paper have been translated to English and can be found in: \"Sources of Colour Science\", Ed. David L. MacAdam, MIT Press (1970).\n\nThe philosophical issues raised by Schrödinger's cat are still debated today and remain his most enduring legacy in popular science, while Schrödinger's equation is his most enduring legacy at a more technical level. To this day, Schrödinger is known as the father of quantum mechanics. The large crater Schrödinger, on the far side of the Moon, is named after him. The Erwin Schrödinger International Institute for Mathematical Physics was established in Vienna in 1993.\n\nSchrödinger's portrait was the main feature of the design of the 1983–97 Austrian 1000-Schilling banknote, the second-highest denomination.\n\nA building is named after him at the University of Limerick, in Limerick, Ireland, as is the 'Erwin Schrödinger Zentrum' at Adlershof in Berlin.\n\nSchrödinger's 126th birthday anniversary was celebrated with a Google Doodle.\n\n\nSchrodinger's cat is named in his honour, see also list of things named after Erwin Schrödinger.\n\n\n\n", "id": "9942", "title": "Erwin Schrödinger"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1506351", "text": "Magnetoreception\n\nMagnetoreception (also magnetoception) is a sense which allows an organism to detect a magnetic field to perceive direction, altitude or location. This sensory modality is used by a range of animals for orientation and navigation, and as a method for animals to develop regional maps. For the purpose of navigation, magnetoreception deals with the detection of the Earth's magnetic field.\n\nMagnetoreception is present in bacteria, arthropods, molluscs and members of all major taxonomic groups of vertebrates. Humans are not thought to have a magnetic sense, but there is a protein (a cryptochrome) in the eye which could serve this function.\n\nAn unequivocal demonstration of the use of magnetic fields for orientation within an organism has been in a class of bacteria known as magnetotactic bacteria. These bacteria demonstrate a behavioural phenomenon known as magnetotaxis, in which the bacterium orients itself and migrates in the direction along the Earth's magnetic field lines. The bacteria contain magnetosomes, which are nanometer-sized particles of magnetite or iron sulfide enclosed within the bacterial cells. The magnetosomes are surrounded by a membrane composed of phospholipids and fatty acids and contain at least 20 different proteins They form in chains where the magnetic moments of each magnetosome align in parallel, causing each bacterium cell to essentially act as a magnetic dipole, giving the bacteria their permanent-magnet characteristics.\n\nFor animals the mechanism for magnetoreception is unknown, but there exist two main hypotheses to explain the phenomenon.\nAccording to one model, magnetoreception is possible via the radical pair mechanism. The radical-pair mechanism is well-established in spin chemistry, and was speculated to apply to magnetoreception in 1978 by Schulten et al.. In 2000, cryptochrome was proposed as the \"magnetic molecule\", so to speak, that could harbor magnetically sensitive radical-pairs. Cryptochrome, a flavoprotein found in the eyes of European robins and other animal species, is the only protein known to form photoinduced radical-pairs in animals. The function of cryptochrome is diverse across species, however, the photoinduction of radical-pairs occurs by exposure to blue light, which excites an electron in a chromophore. The Earth's magnetic field is only 0.5 Gauss and so it is difficult to conceive of a mechanism, other than phase shift, by which such a field could lead to any chemical changes other than those affecting the weak magnetic fields between radical pairs. Cryptochromes are therefore thought to be essential for the light-dependent ability of the fruit fly \"Drosophila melanogaster\" to sense magnetic fields.\n\nThe second proposed model for magnetoreception relies on FeO, also referred to as iron (II, III) oxide or magnetite, a natural oxide with strong magnetism. Iron (II, III) oxide remains permanently magnetized when its length is larger than 50 nm and becomes magnetized when exposed to a magnetic field if its length is less than 50 nm. In both of these situations the Earth's magnetic field leads to a transducible signal via a physical effect on this magnetically sensitive oxide.\n\nAnother less general type of magnetic sensing mechanism in animals that has been thoroughly described is the inductive sensing methods used by sharks, stingrays and chimaeras (cartilaginous fish). These species possess a unique electroreceptive organ known as \"ampullae of Lorenzini\" which can detect a slight variation in electric potential. These organs are made up of mucus-filled canals that connect from the skin's pores to small sacs within the animal's flesh that are also filled with mucus. The ampullae of Lorenzini are capable of detecting DC currents and have been proposed to be used in the sensing of the weak electric fields of prey and predators. These organs could also possibly sense magnetic fields, by means of Faraday's law: as a conductor moves through a magnetic field an electric potential is generated. In this case the conductor is the animal moving through a magnetic field, and the potential induced depends on the time varying rate of flux through the conductor according to\nformula_1.\nThese organs detect very small fluctuations in the potential difference between the pore and the base of the electroreceptor sack. An increase in potential results in a decrease in the rate of nerve activity, and a decrease in potential results in an increase in the rate of nerve activity. This is analogous to the behavior of a current carrying conductor; with a fixed channel resistance, an increase in potential would decrease the amount of current detected, and vice versa. These receptors are located along the mouth and nose of sharks and stingrays.\n\nThe nematode \"Caenorhabditis elegans\" was recently shown to orient to the magnetic field of the earth using the first described set of magnetosensory neurons. Worms appear to use the magnetic field to orient during vertical soil migrations that change in sign depending on their satiation state (with hungry worms burrowing down, and satiated worms burrowing up).\n\nThe mollusc \"Tochuina tetraquetra\" (formerly \"Tritonia diomedea\" or \"Tritonia gigantea\") has been studied for clues as to the neural mechanism behind magnetoreception in a species. Some of the earliest work with \"Tochuina\" showed that prior to a full moon \"Tochuina\" would orient their bodies between magnetic north and east. A Y-maze was established with a right turn equal to geomagnetic south and a left turn equal to geomagnetic east. Within this geomagnetic field 80% of \"Tochuina\" made a turn to the left or magnetic east. However, when a reversed magnetic field was applied that rotated magnetic north 180° there was no significant preference for either turn, which now corresponded with magnetic north and magnetic west. These results, though interesting, do not conclusively establish that \"Tochuina\" uses magnetic fields in magnetoreception. These experiments do not include a control for the activation of the Rubens’ coil in the reversed magnetic field experiments. Therefore, it is possible that heat or noise generated by the coil was responsible for the loss of choice preference. Further work with \"Tochuina\" was unable to identify any neurons that showed rapid changes in firing as a result of magnetic fields. However, pedal 5 neurons, two bisymmetric neurons located within the \"Tochuina\" pedal ganglion, exhibited gradual changes in firing over time following 30 minutes of magnetic stimulation provided by a Rubens’ coil. Further studies showed that pedal 7 neurons in the pedal ganglion were inhibited when exposed to magnetic fields over the course of 30 minutes. The function of both pedal 5 neurons and pedal 7 neurons is currently unknown.\n\n\"Drosophila melanogaster\" is another invertebrate which may be able to orient to magnetic fields. Experimental techniques such as gene knockouts have allowed a closer examination of possible magnetoreception in these fruit flies. Various \"Drosophila\" strains have been trained to respond to magnetic fields. In a choice test flies were loaded into an apparatus with two arms that were surrounded by electric coils. Current was run through each of the coils, but only one was configured to produce a 5-Gauss magnetic field at a time. The flies in this T-maze were tested on their native ability to recognize the presence of the magnetic field in an arm and on their response following training where the magnetic field was paired with a sucrose reward. Many of the strains of flies showed a learned preference for the magnetic field following training. However, when the only cryptochrome found in \"Drosophila\", type 1 Cry, is altered, either through a missense mutation or replacement of the Cry gene, the flies exhibit a loss of magnetosensitivity. Furthermore, when light is filtered to only allow wavelengths greater than 420 nm through, \"Drosophila\" loses its trained response to magnetic fields. This response to filtered light is likely linked to the action spectrum of fly-cryptochrome which has a range from 350 nm – 400 nm and plateaus from 430-450 nm. Although researchers had believed that a tryptophan triad in cryptochrome was responsible for the free radicals on which magnetic fields could act, recent work with \"Drosophila\" has shown that tryptophan might not be behind cryptochrome dependent magnetoreception. Alteration of the tryptophan protein does not result in the loss of magnetosensitivity of a fly expressing either type 1 Cry or the cryptochrome found in vertebrates, type 2 Cry. Therefore, it remains unclear exactly how cryptochrome mediates magnetoreception. These experiments used a 5 gauss magnetic field, 10 times the strength of the Earth's magnetic field). \"Drosophila\" has not been shown to be able to respond to the Earth’s weaker magnetic field.\n\nMagnetoreception is well documented in honey bees, ants and termites. In ants and bees, this is used to orient and navigate in areas around their nests and within their migratory paths. For example, through the use of magnetoreception, the Brazilian stingless bee \"Schwarziana quadripunctata\" is able to distinguish differences in altitude, location, and directionality using the thousands of hair-like particles on its antennae.\n\nHoming pigeons can use magnetic fields as part of their complex navigation system. William Keeton showed that time-shifted homing pigeons are unable to orient themselves correctly on a clear, sunny day which is attributed to time-shifted pigeons being unable to compensate accurately for the movement of the sun during the day. Conversely, time-shifted pigeons released on overcast days navigate correctly. This led to the hypothesis that under particular conditions, homing pigeons rely on magnetic fields to orient themselves. Further experiments with magnets attached to the backs of homing pigeons demonstrated that disruption of the bird’s ability to sense the Earth's magnetic field leads to a loss of proper orientation behavior under overcast conditions. There have been two mechanisms implicated in homing pigeon magnetoreception : the visually mediated free-radical pair mechanism and a magnetite based directional compass or inclination compass. More recent behavioral tests have shown that pigeons are able to detect magnetic anomalies of 186 microtesla (1.86 Gauss).\n\nIn a choice test birds were trained to jump onto a platform on one end of a tunnel if there was no magnetic field present and to jump onto a platform on the other end of the tunnel if a magnetic field was present. In this test, birds were rewarded with a food prize and punished with a time penalty. Homing pigeons were able to make the correct choice 55%-65% of the time which is higher than what would be expected if the pigeons were simply guessing. The ability of pigeons to detect a magnetic field is impaired by application of lidocaine, an anesthetic, to the olfactory mucosa. Furthermore, sectioning the trigeminal nerve leads to an inability to detect a magnetic field, while sectioning of the olfactory nerve has no effect on the magnetic sense of homing pigeons. These results suggest that magnetite located in the beak of pigeons may be responsible for magnetoreception via trigeminal mediation. However, it has not been shown that the magnetite located in the beak of pigeons is capable of responding to a magnetic field with the Earth’s strength. Therefore, the receptor responsible for magnetosensitivity in homing pigeons remains uncertain.\n\nAside from the sensory receptor for magnetic reception in homing pigeons there has been work on neural regions that are possibly involved in the processing of magnetic information within the brain. Areas of the brain that have shown increases in activity in response to magnetic fields with a strength of 50 or 150 microtesla are the posterior vestibular nuclei, dorsal thalamus, hippocampus, and visual hyperpallium.\n\nBecause pigeons provided some of the first evidence for the use of magnetoreception in navigation, they have been an organism of focus in magnetoreception studies. The precise mechanism used by pigeons has not been established and so it is unclear yet whether pigeons rely solely on a cryptochrome-mediated receptor or on beak magnetite.\n\nDomestic hens have iron mineral deposits in the dendrites in the upper beak and are capable of magnetoreception. Because hens use directional information from the magnetic field of the Earth to orient in relatively small areas, this raises the possibility that beak-trimming (removal of part of the beak, to reduce injurious pecking, frequently performed on egg-laying hens) impairs the ability of hens to orient in extensive systems, or to move in and out of buildings in free-range systems.\n\nWork with mice, mole-rats and bats has shown that some mammals are capable of magnetoreception. When woodmice are removed from their home area and deprived of visual and olfactory cues, they orient themselves towards their homes until an inverted magnetic field is applied to their cage. However, when the same mice are allowed access to visual cues, they are able to orient themselves towards home despite the presence of inverted magnetic fields. This indicates that when woodmice are displaced, they use magnetic fields to orient themselves if there are no other cues available. However, early studies of these subjects were criticized because of the difficulty of completely removing sensory cues, and in some because the tests were performed out of the natural environment. In others, the results of these experiments do not conclusively show a response to magnetic fields when deprived of other cues, because the magnetic field was artificially changed before the test rather than during it.\n\nLater research, accounting for those factors, has led to a conclusion that the Zambian mole-rat, a subterranean mammal, uses magnetic fields as a polarity compass to aid in the orientation of their nests. In contrast to work with woodmice, Zambian mole-rats do not exhibit different orientation behavior when a visual cue such as the sun is present, a result that has been suggested is due to their subterranean lifestyle. Further investigation of mole-rat magnetoreception lead to the finding that exposure to magnetic fields leads to an increase in neural activity within the superior colliculus as measured by immediate early gene expression. The activity level of neurons within two levels of the superior colliculus, the outer sublayer of the intermediate gray layer and the deep gray layer, were elevated in a non-specific manner when exposed to various magnetic fields. However, within the inner sublayer of the intermediate gray layer (InGi) there were two or three clusters of responsive cells. The more time the mole rats were exposed to a magnetic field the greater the immediate early gene expression within the InGi. However, if Zambian mole-rats were placed in a field with a shielded magnetic field only a few scattered cells were active. Therefore, it has been proposed that in mammals, the superior colliculus is an important neural structure in the processing of magnetic information.\n\nBats may also use magnetic fields to orient themselves. While it is known that bats use echolocation to navigate over short distances, it is unclear how they navigate over longer distances. When \"Eptesicus fuscus\" are taken from their home roosts and exposed to magnetic fields 90 degrees clockwise or counterclockwise of magnetic north, they are disoriented and set off for their homes in the wrong direction. Therefore, it seems that \"Eptesicus fuscus\" is capable of magnetoreception. However, the exact use of magnetic fields by \"Eptesicus fuscus\" is unclear as the magnetic field could be used either as a map, a compass, or a compass calibrator. Recent research with another bat species, \"Myotis myotis\", supports the hypothesis that bats use magnetic fields as a compass calibrator and their primary compass is the sun.\n\nRed foxes (\"Vulpes vulpes\") may use magnetoreception when predating small rodents. When foxes perform their high-jumps onto small prey like mice and voles, they tend to jump in a north-eastern compass direction. In addition, successful attacks are \"tightly clustered\" to the north. One study has found that when domestic dogs are off the leash and the Earth's magnetic field is calm, they prefer to urinate and defecate with their bodies aligned on a north-south axis.\n\nThere is also evidence for magnetoreception in large mammals. Resting and grazing cattle as well as roe deer (\"Capreolus capreolus\") and red deer (\"Cervus elaphus\") tend to align their body axes in the geomagnetic north-south direction. Because wind, sunshine, and slope could be excluded as common ubiquitous factors in this study, alignment toward the vector of the magnetic field provided the most likely explanation for the observed behaviour. However, because of the descriptive nature of this study, alternative explanations (e.g., the sun compass) could not be excluded. In a follow-up study, researchers analyzed body orientations of ruminants in localities where the geomagnetic field is disturbed by high-voltage power lines to determine how local variation in magnetic fields may affect orientation behaviour. This was done by using satellite and aerial images of herds of cattle and field observations of grazing roe deer. Body orientation of both species was random on pastures under or near power lines. Moreover, cattle exposed to various magnetic fields directly beneath or in the vicinity of power lines trending in various magnetic directions exhibited distinct patterns of alignment. The disturbing effect of the power lines on body alignment diminished with the distance from the conductors. In 2011 a group of Czech researchers, however, reported their failed attempt to replicate the finding using different Google Earth images.\n\nHumans \"are not believed to have a magnetic sense\", but humans do have a cryptochrome (a flavoprotein, CRY2) in the retina which has a light-dependent magnetosensitivity. CRY2 \"has the molecular capability to function as a light-sensitive magnetosensor\", so the area was thought (2011) to be ripe for further study.\n\nThe largest issue affecting verification of an animal magnetic sense is that despite more than 40 years of work on magnetoreception there has yet to be an identification of a sensory receptor. Given that the entire receptor system could likely fit in a one-millimeter cube and have a magnetic content of less than one ppm, it is difficult to discern the parts of the brain where this information is processed. In various organisms a cryptochrome mediated receptor has been implicated in magnetoreception. At the same time a magnetite system has been found to be relevant to magnetosensation in birds. Furthermore, it is possible that both of these mechanisms play a role in magnetic field detection in animals. This dual mechanism theory in birds raises the questions: If such a mechanism is actually responsible for magnetoreception, to what degree is each method responsible for stimulus transduction, and how do they lead to a tranducible signal given a magnetic field with the Earth’s strength?\n\nThe precise purpose of magnetoreception in animal navigation is unclear. Some animals appear to use their magnetic sense as a map, compass, or compass calibrator. The compass method allows animals not only to find north, but also to maintain a constant heading in a particular direction. Although the ability to sense direction is important in migratory navigation, many animals also have the ability to sense small fluctuations in earth’s magnetic field to compute coordinate maps with a resolution of a few kilometers or better. For example, birds such as the homing pigeon are believed to use the magnetite in their beaks to detect magnetic signposts and thus, the magnetic sense they gain from this pathway is a possible map. Yet, it has also been suggested that homing pigeons and other birds use the visually mediated cryptochrome receptor as a compass.\n\nThe purpose of magnetoreception in birds and other animals may be varied, but has proved difficult to study. Numerous studies use magnetic fields larger than the Earth’s field. Studies such as of \"Tritonia\" have used electrophysiological recordings from only one or two neurons, and many others have been solely correlational.\n\n\n", "id": "1506351", "title": "Magnetoreception"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2970491", "text": "Johnjoe McFadden\n\nJohnjoe McFadden (born 17 May 1956) is an Anglo-Irish scientist, academic and writer. He is Professor of Molecular Genetics at the University of Surrey, United Kingdom.\n\nMcFadden was born in Donegal, Ireland but raised in the UK. He holds joint British and Irish Nationality. He obtained his BSc in Biochemistry University of London in 1977 and his PhD at Imperial College London in 1982. He went on to work on human genetic diseases and then infectious diseases, at St Mary's Hospital Medical School, London (1982–84) and St George's Hospital Medical School, London (1984–88) and then at the University of Surrey in Guildford, UK.\n\nFor more than a decade, McFadden has researched the genetics of microbes such as the agents of tuberculosis and meningitis and invented a test for the diagnosis of meningitis. He has published more than 100 articles in scientific journals on subjects as wide-ranging as bacterial genetics, tuberculosis, idiopathic diseases and computer modelling of evolution. He has contributed to more than a dozen books and has edited a book on the genetics of mycobacteria. He produced a widely reported artificial life computer model which modelled evolution in organisms.\n\nMcFadden has lectured extensively in the UK, Europe, the US and Japan and his work has been featured on radio, television and national newspaper articles particularly for the Guardian. His present post, which he has held since 2001, is Professor of Molecular Genetics at the University of Surrey. Living in London, he is married and has one son.\n\nMcFadden wrote the popular science book, \"Quantum Evolution\" on the concept of quantum evolution. The book examines the role of quantum mechanics in life, evolution and consciousness.\n\nIn 2006 McFadden co-edited the book, \"Human Nature: Fact and Fiction\" on the insights of both science and literature on human nature, with contributions from Ian McEwan, Philip Pullman, Steven Pinker, A.C. Grayling and others. \nin 2014 McFadden co-wrote the popular science book, \"Life on the Edge: The Coming Age of Quantum Biology\", in which he and Jim Al-Khalili further explore quantum biology and particularly recent findings in photosynthesis, enzyme catalysis, avian navigation, olfaction, mutation and neurobiology.\n\nThe book received positive reviews, for example:\n\n\"'Life on the Edge’ gives the clearest account I’ve ever read of the possible ways in which the very small events of the quantum world can affect the world of middle-sized living creatures like us. With great vividness and clarity it shows how our world is tinged, even saturated, with the weirdness of the quantum.\" (Philip Pullman)\n\n\"Hugely ambitious ... the skill of the writing provides the uplift to keep us aloft as we fly through the strange and spectacular terra incognita of genuinely new science.\" (Tom Whipple The Times)\n\nMcFadden regularly writes articles for The Guardian newspaper in the UK (, on topics as varied as quantum mechanics, evolution and genetically modified crops, and has reviewed books there. The Washington Post and Frankfurter Allgemeine Sonntagszeitung have also published his articles.\n\n\n", "id": "2970491", "title": "Johnjoe McFadden"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18404729", "text": "Quantum Aspects of Life\n\nQuantum Aspects of Life is a 2008 science text, with a foreword by Sir Roger Penrose, which explores the open question of the role of quantum mechanics at molecular scales of relevance to biology. The book adopts a debate-like style and contains chapters written by various world-experts; giving rise to a mix of both sceptical and sympathetic viewpoints. The book addresses questions of quantum physics, biophysics, nanoscience, quantum chemistry, mathematical biology, complexity theory, and philosophy that are inspired by the 1944 seminal book \"What Is Life?\" by Erwin Schrödinger.\n\n\n\n", "id": "18404729", "title": "Quantum Aspects of Life"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=712245", "text": "Orchestrated objective reduction\n\nOrchestrated objective reduction (Orch-OR) is a hypothesis that consciousness in the brain originates from processes \"inside\" neurons, rather than from connections \"between\" neurons (the conventional view). The mechanism is held to be a quantum physics process called objective reduction that is orchestrated by molecular structures called microtubules. Objective reduction is proposed to be influenced by non-computable factors imbedded in spacetime geometry which thus may account for the Hard Problem of Consciousness. The hypothesis was put forward in the early 1990s by theoretical physicist Roger Penrose and anaesthesiologist and psychologist Stuart Hameroff.\n\nThe hypothesis states that consciousness derives from deeper-level, finer-scale quantum activities inside cells, most prevalent in the neurons. It combines approaches from molecular biology, neuroscience, quantum physics, pharmacology, philosophy, quantum information theory and from a yet to come theory to \"gravitize\" quantum mechanics.\n\nWhile mainstream theories assert that consciousness emerges as the complexity of the computations performed by cerebral neurons increases, Orch-OR posits that consciousness is based on non-computable quantum processing performed by qubits formed collectively on cellular microtubules, a process significantly amplified in the neurons. The qubits are based on oscillating dipoles forming superposed resonance rings in helical pathways throughout microtubule lattices. The oscillations are either electric, due to charge separation from London forces, or (most favorably) magnetic, due to electron spin—and possibly also due to nuclear spins (that can remain isolated for longer periods) and that occur in gigahertz, megahertz and kilohertz frequency ranges. Orchestration refers to the hypothetical process by which connective proteins, such as microtubule-associated proteins (MAPs), influence or orchestrate qubit state reduction by modifying the spacetime-separation of their superimposed states. The latter is based on Penrose's objective collapse theory for interpreting quantum mechanics, which postulates the existence of an objective threshold governing the collapse of quantum-states, related to the difference of the space-time curvature of these states in the universe's fine scale structure.\n\nThe basis of Orch-OR has been criticized from its inception by mathematicians, philosophers, and scientists, prompting the authors to revise and elaborate many of the theory's peripheral assumptions, retaining the core hypothesis. The criticism concentrated on three issues: Penrose's interpretation of Gödel's theorem; Penrose's abductive reasoning linking non-computability to quantum processes; the brain's unsuitability to host the quantum phenomena required by the theory, since it is considered too \"\"warm, wet and noisy\"\" to avoid decoherence. In other words, there is a missing link between physics and neuroscience and to date, it is too premature to claim that the Orch-OR hypothesis is right or wrong.\n\nThe Penrose–Lucas argument states that, because humans are capable of knowing the truth of Gödel-unprovable statements, human thought is necessarily non-computable.\n\nIn 1931, mathematician and logician Kurt Gödel proved that any effectively generated theory capable of proving basic arithmetic cannot be both consistent and complete. Furthermore, he showed that any such theory also including a statement of its own consistency is inconsistent. A key element of the proof is the use of Gödel numbering to construct a \"Gödel sentence\" for the theory, which encodes a statement of its own incompleteness, e.g. \"This theory can't assert the truth of this statement.\" This statement is either true but unprovable (incompleteness) \"or\" false and provable (inconsistency). An analogous statement has been used to show that humans are subject to the same limits as machines.\n\nHowever, in his first book on consciousness, \"The Emperor's New Mind\" (1989), Penrose made Gödel's theorem the basis of what quickly became a controversial claim. He argued that while a formal proof system cannot prove its own consistency, Gödel-unprovable results are provable by human mathematicians. He takes this disparity to mean that human mathematicians are not describable as formal proof systems, and are therefore running a non-computable algorithm. Similar claims about the implications of Gödel's theorem were originally espoused by the philosopher John Lucas of Merton College, Oxford in 1961.\nIf correct, the Penrose–Lucas argument creates a need to understand the physical basis of non-computable behaviour in the brain. Most physical laws are computable, and thus algorithmic. However, Penrose determined that wave function collapse was a prime candidate for a non-computable process.\n\nIn quantum mechanics, particles are treated differently from the objects of classical mechanics. Particles are described by wave functions that evolve according to the Schrödinger equation. Non-stationary wave functions are linear combinations of the eigenstates of the system, a phenomenon described by the superposition principle. When a quantum system interacts with a classical system—i.e. when an observable is measured—the system appears to collapse to a random eigenstate of that observable from a classical vantage point.\n\nIf collapse is truly random, then no process or algorithm can deterministically predict its outcome. This provided Penrose with a candidate for the physical basis of the non-computable process that he hypothesized to exist in the brain. However, he disliked the random nature of environmentally-induced collapse, as randomness was not a promising basis for mathematical understanding. Penrose proposed that isolated systems may still undergo a new form of wave function collapse, which he called objective reduction (OR).\n\nPenrose sought to reconcile general relativity and quantum theory using his own ideas about the possible structure of spacetime. He suggested that at the Planck scale curved spacetime is not continuous, but discrete. Penrose postulated that each separated quantum superposition has its own piece of spacetime curvature, a blister in spacetime. Penrose suggests that gravity exerts a force on these spacetime blisters, which become unstable above the Planck scale of formula_1 and collapse to just one of the possible states. The rough threshold for OR is given by Penrose's indeterminacy principle:\nwhere:\nThus, the greater the mass-energy of the object, the faster it will undergo OR and vice versa. Atomic-level superpositions would require 10 million years to reach OR threshold, while an isolated 1 kilogram object would reach OR threshold in 10s. Objects somewhere between these two scales could collapse on a timescale relevant to neural processing.\n\nAn essential feature of Penrose's theory is that the choice of states when objective reduction occurs is selected neither randomly (as are choices following wave function collapse) nor algorithmically. Rather, states are selected by a \"non-computable\" influence embedded in the Planck scale of spacetime geometry. Penrose claimed that such information is Platonic, representing pure mathematical truth, aesthetic and ethical values at the Planck scale. This relates to Penrose's ideas concerning the three worlds: physical, mental, and the Platonic mathematical world. In his theory, the Platonic world corresponds to the geometry of fundamental spacetime that is claimed to support non-computational thinking.\n\nNo evidence supports Penrose's objective reduction, but the theory is considered testable and the FELIX (experiment) has been suggested to evaluate and measure the objective criterion.\n\nIn August 2013, Penrose and Hameroff reported that the experiments had been carried out by Bandyopadhyay et al., supporting Penrose's theory on six out of his twenty theses, while invalidating none of the others. They subsequently responded to critiques, including a 2013 critique from Reimers' group.\n\nPenrose and Hameroff initially developed their ideas quite separately from one another, and it was only in the 1990s that they cooperated to produce the Orch-OR theory. Penrose came to the problem from the view point of mathematics and in particular Gödel's theorem, while Hameroff approached it from a career in cancer research and anesthesia that had given him an interest in brain structures. Specifically, when Penrose wrote his first consciousness book, \"The Emperor's New Mind\" in 1989, he lacked a detailed proposal for how such quantum processes could be implemented in the brain. Subsequently, Hameroff read \"The Emperor's New Mind\" and suggested to Penrose that certain structures within brain cells (neurons) were suitable candidate sites for quantum processing and ultimately for consciousness. The Orch-OR theory arose from the cooperation of these two scientists, and was developed in Penrose's second consciousness book \"Shadows of the Mind\" (1994).\n\nHameroff's contribution to the theory derived from studying brain cells. His interest centered on the cytoskeleton, which provides an internal supportive structure for neurons, and particularly on the microtubules, which are the most important component of the cytoskeleton. As neuroscience has progressed, the role of the cytoskeleton and microtubules has assumed greater importance. In addition to providing structural support, microtubule functions include axoplasmic transport and control of the cell's movement, growth and shape.\n\nHameroff proposed that microtubules were suitable candidates for quantum processing. Microtubules are made up of tubulin protein subunits. The tubulin protein dimers of the microtubules have hydrophobic pockets that may contain delocalized π electrons. Tubulin has other, smaller non-polar regions, for example 8 tryptophans per tubulin, which contain π electron-rich indole rings distributed throughout tubulin with separations of roughly 2 nm. Hameroff claims that this is close enough for the tubulin π electrons to become quantum entangled. During entanglement, particle states become inseparably correlated.\n\nHameroff originally suggested the tubulin-subunit electrons would form a Bose–Einstein condensate. He then proposed a Frohlich condensate, a hypothetical coherent oscillation of dipolar molecules. However, this too was rejected by Reimers' group. Hameroff then responded to Reimers. \"Reimers et al have most definitely NOT shown that strong or coherent Frohlich condensation in microtubules is unfeasible. The model microtubule on which they base their Hamiltonian is not a microtubule structure, but a simple linear chain of oscillators.\" Hameroff reasoned that such condensate behavior would magnify nanoscopic quantum effects to have large scale influences in the brain.\n\nHameroff proposed that condensates in microtubules in one neuron can link with microtubule condensates in other neurons and glial cells via the gap junctions of electrical synapses. Hameroff proposed that the gap between the cells is sufficiently small that quantum objects can tunnel across it, allowing them to extend across a large area of the brain. He further postulated that the action of this large-scale quantum activity is the source of 40 Hz gamma waves, building upon the much less controversial theory that gap junctions are related to the gamma oscillation.\n\nThe Orch-OR theory combines the Penrose–Lucas argument with Hameroff's hypothesis on quantum processing in microtubules. It proposes that when condensates in the brain undergo an objective wave function reduction, their collapse connects non-computational decision-making to experiences embedded in spacetime's fundamental geometry.\n\nThe theory further proposes that the microtubules both influence and are influenced by the conventional activity at the synapses between neurons.\n\nIn 1998 Hameroff made 8 probable assumptions and 20 testable predictions to back his proposal.\n\nIn January 2014 Hameroff and Penrose announced that the discovery of quantum vibrations in microtubules by Anirban Bandyopadhyay of the National Institute for Materials Science in Japan provides favorable evidence towards the Orch-OR hypothesis.\n\nThe Orch-OR theory was criticized by scientists who considered it to be a poor model of brain physiology. \n\nThe Penrose–Lucas argument about the implications of Gödel's incompleteness theorem for computational theories of human intelligence was criticized by mathematicians, computer scientists, and philosophers, and the consensus among experts in these fields is that the argument fails, with different authors attacking different aspects of the argument.\n\nLaForte pointed out that in order to know the truth of an unprovable Gödel sentence, one must already know the formal system is consistent. Referencing Benacerraf, he then demonstrated that humans cannot prove that they are consistent, and in all likelihood human brains are inconsistent. He pointed to contradictions within Penrose's own writings as examples. Similarly, Minsky argued that because humans can believe false ideas to be true, human mathematical understanding need not be consistent and consciousness may easily have a deterministic basis.\n\nFeferman faulted detailed points in Penrose's second book, \"Shadows of the Mind\". He argued that mathematicians do not progress by mechanistic search through proofs, but by trial-and-error reasoning, insight and inspiration, and that machines do not share this approach with humans. He pointed out that everyday mathematics can be formalized. He also rejected Penrose's Platonism.\n\nSearle criticized Penrose's appeal to Gödel as resting on the fallacy that all computational algorithms must be capable of mathematical description. As a counter-example, Searle cited the assignment of license plate numbers to specific vehicle identification numbers, as part of vehicle registration. According to Searle, no mathematical function can be used to connect a known VIN with its LPN, but the process of assignment is quite simple—namely, \"first come, first served\"—and can be performed entirely by a computer. However, since an algorithm (as defined in the Oxford American Dictionary) is a 'set of rules to be followed in calculations or problem-solving operations', the assignment of LPN to a VIN is not an algorithm as such, merely the use of a database in which every VIN has a corresponding LPN. No algorithm could arbitrarily 'compute' database assignments. Thus, Searle's counter-example does not describe a computational algorithm that is not mathematically describable.\n\nIn 2000 Tegmark claimed that any quantum coherent system in the brain would undergo effective wave function collapse due to environmental interaction long before it could influence neural processes (the \"\"warm, wet and noisy\"\" argument, as it was later came to be known). He determined the decoherence timescale of microtubule entanglement at brain temperatures to be on the order of femtoseconds, far too brief for neural processing. Other scientists sided with Tegmark's analysis, insisting that quantum coherence does not play, or does not need to play any major role in neurophysiology.\n\nIn response to Tegmark's claims, Hagan, Tuszynski and Hameroff claimed that Tegmark did not address the Orch-OR model, but instead a model of his own construction. This involved superpositions of quanta separated by 24 nm rather than the much smaller separations stipulated for Orch-OR. As a result, Hameroff's group claimed a decoherence time seven orders of magnitude greater than Tegmark's, although still far below 25 ms. Hameroff's group also suggested that the Debye layer of counterions could screen thermal fluctuations, and that the surrounding actin gel might enhance the ordering of water, further screening noise. They also suggested that incoherent metabolic energy could further order water, and finally that the configuration of the microtubule lattice might be suitable for quantum error correction, a means of resisting quantum decoherence.\n\nSince the 90's numerous counter-observations to the \"warm, wet and noisy\" argument existed at ambient temperatures, \"in vitro\" and \"in vivo\" (i.e. photosynthesis, bird navigation). For example, Harvard researchers achieved quantum states lasting for 2 sec at room temperatures using diamonds. Plants routinely use quantum-coherent electron transport at ambient temperatures in photosynthesis. In 2014, researchers used theoretical quantum biophysics and computer simulations to analyze quantum coherence among tryptophan π resonance rings in tubulin. They claimed that quantum dipole coupling among tryptophan π resonance clouds, mediated by exciton hopping or Forster resonance energy transfer (FRET) across the tubulin protein are plausible.\n\nIn 2007, Gregory S. Engel claimed that all arguments concerning the brain being \"too warm and wet\" have been dispelled, as multiple \"warm and wet\" quantum processes have been discovered.\n\nIn 2009, Reimers \"et al.\" and McKemmish \"et al.,\" published critical assessments. Earlier versions of the theory had required tubulin-electrons to form either Bose–Einsteins or Frohlich condensates, and the Reimers group claimed that these were experimentally unfounded. Additionally they claimed that microtubules could only support 'weak' 8 MHz coherence. The first argument was voided by revisions of the theory that described dipole oscillations due to London forces and possibly due to magnetic and/or nuclear spin cloud formations. On the second issue the theory was retrofitted so that 8 MHz coherence is sufficient to support the whole Orch-OR hypothesis.\n\nMcKemmish \"et al.\" made two claims: that aromatic molecules cannot switch states because they are delocalised; and that changes in tubulin protein-conformation driven by GTP conversion would result in a prohibitive energy requirement. Hameroff and Penrose responded to the first claim by stating that they were referring to the behaviour of two or more electron clouds, inherently non-localised. For the second claim they stated that no GTP conversion is needed since (in that version of the theory) the conformation-switching is not necessary, replaced by oscillation due to the London forces produced by the electron cloud dipole states.\n\nIn 1998, Hameroff proposed that microtubule coherence reaches the synapses via dendritic lamellar bodies (DLBs), where it could influence synaptic firing and be transmitted across the synaptic cleft. De Zeeuw \"et al.\" had already proved this to be impossible in 1995, by showing that DLBs are located micrometers away from gap junctions. Bandyopadhyay \"et. al.\" speculated that this issue might be resolved if their notion of wireless transmission of information globally across the entire brain is proven. Hameroff and Penrose doubt whether such a wireless transmission would be capable of transmitting superimposed quantum-states.\n\nHameroff's 1998 hypothesis required that cortical dendrites contain primarily 'A' lattice microtubules, but in 1994 Kikkawa \"et al.\" showed that all \"in vivo\" microtubules have a 'B' lattice and a seam. Then Bandyopadhyay showed that microtubules can change their structure from B-lattice to A-lattice as part of the processing of information, and that tubulin in microtubules exists in multiple states.\n\nOrch-OR also required gap junctions between neurons and glial cells, yet Binmöller \"et. al.\" proved in 1992 that these don't exist. But a 1999 research supported the evidence between neurons and astrocytes.\n\nHameroff speculated that visual photons in the retina are detected directly by the cones and rods instead of decohering and subsequently connect with the retinal glia cells via gap junctions, but this too was falsified.\n\nOther biology-based criticisms have been offered. Papers by Georgiev point to problems with Hameroff's proposals, including a lack of explanation for the probabilistic firing of axonal synapses and an error in the calculated number of the tubulin dimers per cortical neuron. Hameroff insisted in a 2013 interview that those falsifications were invalid.\n\n\n", "id": "712245", "title": "Orchestrated objective reduction"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2334511", "text": "What Is Life?\n\nWhat Is Life? The Physical Aspect of the Living Cell is a 1944 science book written for the lay reader by physicist Erwin Schrödinger. The book was based on a course of public lectures delivered by Schrödinger in February 1943, under the auspices of the Dublin Institute for Advanced Studies at Trinity College, Dublin. The lectures attracted an audience of about 400, who were warned \"that the subject-matter was a difficult one and that the lectures could not be termed popular, even though the physicist’s most dreaded weapon, mathematical deduction, would hardly be utilized.\" Schrödinger's lecture focused on one important question: \"how can the events in space and time which take place within the spatial boundary of a living organism be accounted for by physics and chemistry?\"\n\nIn the book, Schrödinger introduced the idea of an \"aperiodic crystal\" that contained genetic information in its configuration of covalent chemical bonds. In the 1950s, this idea stimulated enthusiasm for discovering the genetic molecule. Although the existence of some form of hereditary information had been hypothesized since 1869, its role in reproduction and its helical shape were still unknown at the time of Schrödinger's lecture. In retrospect, Schrödinger's aperiodic crystal can be viewed as a well-reasoned theoretical prediction of what biologists should have been looking for during their search for genetic material. Both James D. Watson, and independently, Francis Crick, co-discoverers of the structure of DNA, credited Schrödinger's book with presenting an early theoretical description of how the storage of genetic information would work, and each respectively acknowledged the book as a source of inspiration for their initial researches.\n\nThe book is based on lectures delivered under the auspices of the Institute at Trinity College, Dublin, in February 1943 and published in 1944. At that time DNA was not yet accepted as the carrier of hereditary information, which only was the case after the Hershey–Chase experiment of 1952. One of the most successful branches of physics at this time was statistical physics, and quantum mechanics, a theory which is also very statistical in its nature. Schrödinger himself is one of the founding fathers of quantum mechanics.\n\nMax Delbrück's thinking about the physical basis of life was an important influence on Schrödinger. However, long before the publication of \"What is Life?\", geneticist and 1946 Nobel-prize winner H. J. Muller had in his 1922 article \"Variation due to Change in the Individual Gene\" already laid out all the basic properties of the \"heredity molecule\" (then not yet known to be DNA) that Schrödinger was to re-derive in 1944 \"from first principles\" in \"What is Life?\" (including the \"aperiodicity\" of the molecule), properties which Muller specified and refined additionally in his 1929 article \"The Gene As The Basis of Life\" and during the 1930s. Moreover, H. J. Muller himself wrote in a 1960 letter to a journalist regarding \"What Is Life?\" that whatever the book got right about the \"hereditary molecule\" had already been published before 1944 and that Schrödinger's were only the wrong speculations; Muller also named two famous geneticists (including Delbrück) who knew every relevant pre-1944 publication and had been in contact with Schrödinger before 1944. But DNA as the molecule of heredity became topical only after Oswald Avery's most important bacterial-transformation experiments in 1944. Before these experiments, proteins were considered the most likely candidates.\n\nIn chapter I, Schrödinger explains that most physical laws on a large scale are due to chaos on a small scale. He calls this principle \"order-from-disorder.\" As an example he mentions diffusion, which can be modeled as a highly ordered process, but which is caused by random movement of atoms or molecules. If the number of atoms is reduced, the behaviour of a system becomes more and more random. He states that life greatly depends on order and that a naïve physicist may assume that the master code of a living organism has to consist of a large number of atoms.\n\nIn chapter II and III, he summarizes what was known at this time about the hereditary mechanism. Most importantly, he elaborates the important role mutations play in evolution. He concludes that the carrier of hereditary information has to be both small in size and permanent in time, contradicting the naïve physicist's expectation. This contradiction cannot be resolved by classical physics.\n\nIn chapter IV, Schrödinger presents molecules, which are indeed stable even if they consist of only a few atoms, as the solution. Even though molecules were known before, their stability could not be explained by classical physics, but is due to the discrete nature of quantum mechanics. Furthermore, mutations are directly linked to quantum leaps.\n\nHe continues to explain, in chapter V, that true solids, which are also permanent, are crystals. The stability of molecules and crystals is due to the same principles and a molecule might be called \"the germ of a solid.\" On the other hand, an amorphous solid, without crystalline structure, should be regarded as a liquid with a very high viscosity. Schrödinger believes the heredity material to be a molecule, which unlike a crystal does not repeat itself. He calls this an aperiodic crystal. Its aperiodic nature allows it to encode an almost infinite number of possibilities with a small number of atoms. He finally compares this picture with the known facts and finds it in accordance with them.\n\nIn chapter VI Schrödinger states:\n\nHe knows that this statement is open to misconception and tries to clarify it. The main principle involved with \"order-from-disorder\" is the second law of thermodynamics, according to which entropy only increases in a closed system (such as the universe). Schrödinger explains that living matter evades the decay to thermodynamical equilibrium by homeostatically maintaining negative entropy (today this quantity is called information) in an open system.\n\nIn chapter VII, he maintains that \"order-from-order\" is not absolutely new to physics; in fact, it is even simpler and more plausible. But nature follows \"order-from-disorder\", with some exceptions as the movement of the celestial bodies and the behaviour of mechanical devices such as clocks. But even those are influenced by thermal and frictional forces. The degree to which a system functions mechanically or statistically depends on the temperature. If heated, a clock ceases to function, because it melts. Conversely, if the temperature approaches absolute zero, any system behaves more and more mechanically. Some systems approach this mechanical behaviour rather fast with room temperature already being practically equivalent to absolute zero.\n\nSchrödinger concludes this chapter and the book with philosophical speculations on determinism, free will, and the mystery of human consciousness. He attempts to \"see whether we cannot draw the correct non-contradictory conclusion from the following two premises: (1) My body functions as a pure mechanism according to Laws of Nature; and (2) Yet I know, by incontrovertible direct experience, that I am directing its motions, of which I foresee the effects, that may be fateful and all-important, in\n\nwhich case I feel and take full responsibility for them. The only possible inference from these two facts is, I think, that I – I in the widest meaning of the word, that is to say, every conscious mind that has ever said or felt 'I' – am the person, if any, who controls the 'motion of the atoms' according to the Laws of Nature\" Schrödinger then states that this insight is not new and that Upanishads considered this insight of \"ATHMAN = BRAHMAN\" to \"represent quintessence of deepest insights into the happenings of the world. Schrödinger rejects the idea that the source of consciousness should perish with the body because he finds the idea \"distasteful\". He also rejects the idea that there are multiple immortal souls that can exist without the body because he believes that consciousness is nevertheless highly dependent on the body. Schrödinger writes that, to reconcile the two premises,The only possible alternative is simply to keep to the immediate experience that consciousness is a singular of which the plural is unknown; that there is only one thing and that what seems to be a plurality is merely a series of different aspects of this one thing…\n\nAny intuitions that consciousness is plural, he says, are illusions. Schrödinger is sympathetic to the Hindu concept of Brahman, by which each individual's consciousness is only a manifestation of a unitary consciousness pervading the universe — which corresponds to the Hindu concept of God. Schrödinger concludes that \"…'I' am the person, if any, who controls the 'motion of the atoms' according to the Laws of Nature.\" However, he also qualifies the conclusion as \"necessarily subjective\" in its \"philosophical implications\". In the final paragraph, he points out that what is meant by \"I\" is not the collection of experienced events but \"namely the canvas upon which they are collected.\" If a hypnotist succeeds in blotting out all earlier reminiscences, he writes, there would be no loss of personal existence — \"Nor will there ever be.\"\n\nIn a world governed by the second law of thermodynamics, all isolated systems are expected to approach a state of maximum disorder. Since life approaches and maintains a highly ordered state, some argue that this seems to violate the aforementioned second law, implying that there is a paradox. However, since the biosphere is not an isolated system, there is no paradox. The increase of order inside an organism is more than paid for by an increase in disorder outside this organism by the loss of heat into the environment. By this mechanism, the second law is obeyed, and life maintains a highly ordered state, which it sustains by causing a net increase in disorder in the Universe. In order to increase the complexity on Earth—as life does—free energy is needed and in this case is provided by the Sun.\n\n\n\n", "id": "2334511", "title": "What Is Life?"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4009213", "text": "Viral eukaryogenesis\n\nViral eukaryogenesis is the hypothesis that the cell nucleus of eukaryotic life forms evolved from a large DNA virus in a form of endosymbiosis within a methanogenic archaeon. The virus later evolved into the eukaryotic nucleus by acquiring genes from the host genome and eventually usurping its role. The hypothesis was proposed by Philip Bell in 2001 and gained support as large, complex DNA viruses (such as Mimivirus) capable of protein biosynthesis were discovered. Recent supporting evidence includes the discovery that, upon the infection of a bacterial cell, the giant bacteriophage 201Phi2-1 assembles a nucleus-like structure that segregates proteins according to function . This nucleus-like structure and its key properties have been found conserved in the related phages. \n\nThe viral eukayogenesis hypothesis has inflamed the longstanding debate over whether viruses are living organisms. Most virologists have considered viruses as not alive; but the hypothesis posits that viruses are the ancestors of the shared genetic code of all eukaryotes and prokaryotes alive today.\n\nLike viruses, a eukaryotic nucleus contains linear chromosomes with specialized end sequences (in contrast to bacterial genomes, which have a circular topology); it uses mRNA capping, and separates transcription from translation. Eukaryotic nuclei are also capable of cytoplasmic replication. Some large viruses have their own DNA-directed RNA polymerase. Transfers of \"infectious\" nuclei have been documented in many parasitic red algae. \n\nThe viral eukaryogenesis hypothesis posits that eukaryotes are composed of three ancestral elements: a viral component that became the modern nucleus; a prokaryotic cell (originally thought to be very primitive but more probably an archaeon according to Eocyte hypothesis) that donated the cytoplasm and cell membrane of modern cells; and another prokaryotic (bacterial) cell that, by endocytosis, became the modern mitochondrion or chloroplast. Molecular homology suggests that all life shares a single common ancestor, and evidence, alongside the fossil record, can be found in the evolution of prokaryotes, and Archaea prior to the eukaryotes. The viral eukaryogenesis hypothesis points to the cell cycle of eukaryotes, particularly sex and meiosis, as evidence. Little is known about DNA or the origins of reproduction in prokaryotic or eukaryotic cells. It is thus possible that viruses were involved in the creation of Earth's first cells.\n\nIn 2006, researchers suggested that the transition from RNA to DNA genomes first occurred in the viral world. A DNA-based virus may have provided storage for an ancient host that had previously used RNA to store its genetic information (such host is called ribocell or ribocyte). Viruses may initially have adopted DNA as a way to resist RNA-degrading enzymes in the host cells. Hence, the contribution from such a new component may have been as significant as the contribution from chloroplasts or mitochondria. Following this hypothesis, archaea, Bacteria, and eukaryotes each obtained their DNA informational system from a different virus. In the original paper it was also an RNA cell at the origin of eukaryotes, but eventually more complex, featuring RNA processing. Although this is in contrast to nowadays more probable Eocyte hypothesis, viruses seem to have contributed to the origin of all three domains of life ('out of virus hypothesis'). It has also been suggested that telomerase and telomeres, key aspects of eukaryotic cell replication, have viral origins. Further, the viral origins of the modern eukaryotic nucleus may have relied on multiple infections of archaeal cells carrying bacterial mitochondrial precursors with lysogenic viruses.\n\nThe viral eukaryogenesis hypothesis depicts a model of eukaryotic evolution in which a virus, similar to a modern pox virus, evolved into a nucleus via gene acquisition from existing bacterial and archaeal species. The lysogenic virus then became the information storage center for the cell, while the cell retained its capacities for gene translation and general function despite the viral genome's entry. Similarly, the bacterial species involved in this eukaryogenesis retained its capacity to produce energy in the form of ATP while also passing much of its genetic information into this new virus-nucleus organelle. It is hypothesized that the modern cell cycle, whereby mitosis, meiosis, and sex occur in all eukaryotes, evolved because of the balances struck by viruses, which characteristically follow a pattern of tradeoff between infecting as many hosts as possible and killing an individual host through viral proliferation. Hypothetically, viral replication cycles may mirror those of plasmids and viral lysogens. However, this theory is controversial, and additional experimentation involving archaeal viruses is necessary, as they are probably the most evolutionarily similar to modern eukaryotic nuclei.\n\nA number of precepts in the theory are possible. For instance, a helical virus with a bilipid envelope bears a distinct resemblance to a highly simplified cellular nucleus (i.e., a DNA chromosome encapsulated within a lipid membrane). In theory, a large DNA virus could take control of a bacterial or archaeal cell. Instead of replicating and destroying the host cell, it would remain within the cell, thus overcoming the tradeoff dilemma typically faced by viruses. With the virus in control of the host cell's molecular machinery, it would effectively become a functional nucleus. Through the processes of mitosis and cytokinesis, the virus would thus recruit the entire cell as a symbiont—a new way to survive and proliferate.\n\nThe similarities between DNA viruses and nuclei can be taken as evidence either of viral eukaryogensis or of its converse, nuclear viriogenesis: that complex eukaryotic DNA viruses could have originated from infectious nuclei.\n\n\n", "id": "4009213", "title": "Viral eukaryogenesis"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20134016", "text": "CoRR hypothesis\n\nThe CoRR hypothesis states that the location of genetic information in cytoplasmic organelles permits regulation of its expression by the reduction-oxidation (\"redox\") state of its gene products.\n\nCoRR is short for \"co-location for redox regulation\", itself a shortened form of \"co-location (of gene and gene product) for (evolutionary) continuity of redox regulation of gene expression\".\nCoRR was put forward explicitly in 1993 in a paper in the \"Journal of Theoretical Biology\" with the title \"Control of gene expression by redox potential and the requirement for chloroplast and mitochondrial genomes\". The central concept had been outlined in a review of 1992. The term CoRR was introduced in 2003 in a paper in \"Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society\" entitled \"The function of genomes in bioenergetic organelles\".\n\nChloroplasts and mitochondria are energy-converting organelles in the cytoplasm of eukaryotic cells. Chloroplasts in plant cells perform photosynthesis; the capture and conversion of the energy of sunlight. Mitochondria in both plant and animal cells perform respiration; the release of this stored energy when work is done. In addition to these key reactions of bioenergetics, chloroplasts and mitochondria each contain specialized and discrete genetic systems. These genetic systems enable chloroplasts and mitochondria to make some of their own proteins.\n\nBoth the genetic and energy-converting systems of chloroplasts and mitochondria are descended, with little modification, from those of the free-living bacteria that these organelles once were. The existence of these cytoplasmic genomes is consistent with, and counts as evidence for, the endosymbiont hypothesis. Most genes for proteins of chloroplasts and mitochondria are, however, now located on chromosomes in the nuclei of eukaryotic cells. There they code for protein precursors that are made in the cytosol for subsequent import into the organelles.\n\nCoRR seeks to explain why chloroplasts and mitochondria retain DNA, and thus why some characters are inherited through the cytoplasm in the phenomenon of cytoplasmic, non-Mendelian, uniparental, or maternal inheritance. CoRR does so by offering an answer to this question: why, in evolution, did some bacterial, endosymbiont genes move to the cell nucleus, while others did not?\n\nCoRR states that chloroplasts and mitochondria contain those genes whose expression is required to be under the direct, regulatory control of the redox state of their gene products, or of electron carriers with which those gene products interact. Such genes comprise a core, or primary subset, of organellar genes. The requirement for redox control of each gene in the primary subset then confers an advantage upon location of that gene within the organelle. Natural selection therefore anchors some genes in organelles, while favouring location of others in the cell nucleus.\n\nChloroplast and mitochondrial genomes also contain genes for components of the chloroplast and mitochondrial genetic systems themselves. These genes comprise a secondary subset of organellar genes: genetic system genes. There is generally no requirement for redox control of expression of genetic system genes, though their being subject to redox control may, in some cases, allow amplification of redox signals acting upon genes in the primary subset (bioenergetic genes).\n\nRetention of genes of the secondary subset (genetic system genes) is necessary for the operation of redox control of expression of genes in the primary subset. If all genes disappear from the primary subset, CoRR predicts that there is no function for genes in the secondary subset, and such organelles will then, eventually, lose their genomes completely. However, if even only one gene remains under redox control, then an organelle genetic system is required for the synthesis of its single gene product.\n\n\n", "id": "20134016", "title": "CoRR hypothesis"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1398187", "text": "Cytoplasmic hybrid\n\nA cytoplasmic hybrid (or cybrid, a portmanteau of the two words) is a eukaryotic cell line produced by the fusion of a whole cell with a cytoplast. Cytoplasts are enucleated cells. This enucleation can be effected by simultaneous application of centrifugal force and treatment of the cell with an agent that disrupts the cytoskeleton. A special case of cybrid formation involves the use of \"rho-zero\" cells as the whole cell partner in the fusion. Rho-zero cells are cells which have been depleted of their own mitochondrial DNA by prolonged incubation with ethidium bromide, a chemical which inhibits mitochondrial DNA replication. The rho-zero cells do retain mitochondria and can grow in rich culture medium with certain supplements. They do retain their own nuclear genome. A cybrid is then a hybrid cell which mixes the nuclear genes from one cell with the mitochondrial genes from another cell. Using this powerful tool, it makes it possible to dissociate contribution from the mitochondrial genes vs that of the nuclear genes.\n\nCybrids are valuable in mitochondrial research and have been used to provide suggestive evidence of mitochondrial involvement in Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and other conditions.\n\nResearch utilizing cybrids has been hotly contested due to the ethical implications of further cybrid research. Recently, the House of Lords passed the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act 2008, which allows the creation of mixed human-animal embryos for medical purposes only. Such cybrids are 99.9% human and 0.1% animal. A cybrid may be kept for a maximum of 14 days, owing to the development of the brain and spinal cord, after which time the cybrid must be destroyed. During the two-week period, stem cells may be harvested from the cybrid, for research or medical purposes. Under no circumstances may a cybrid be implanted into a human uterus.\n\n\n", "id": "1398187", "title": "Cytoplasmic hybrid"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6113380", "text": "Punctuated gradualism\n\nPunctuated gradualism is a microevolutionary hypothesis that refers to a species that has \"relative stasis over a considerable part of its total duration [and] underwent periodic, relatively rapid, morphologic change that did not lead to lineage branching\". It is one of the three common models of evolution. While the traditional model of paleontology, the phylogenetic model, posits that features evolved slowly without any direct association with speciation, the relatively newer and more controversial idea of punctuated equilibrium claims that major evolutionary changes don't happen over a gradual period but in localized, rare, rapid events of branching speciation.\n\nPunctuated gradualism is considered to be a variation of these models, lying somewhere in between the phyletic gradualism model and the punctuated equilibrium model. It states that speciation is not needed for a lineage to rapidly evolve from one equilibrium to another but may show rapid transitions between long-stable states. \n\nIn 1983, Malmgren and colleagues published a paper called \"Evidence for punctuated gradualism in the late Neogene Globorotalia tumida lineage of planktonic foraminifera.\" This paper studied the lineage of planktonic foraminifera, specifically the evolutionary transition from \"G. plesiotumida\" to \"G. tumida\" across the Miocene/Pliocene boundary. The study found that the \"G. tumida\" lineage, while remaining in relative stasis over a considerable part of its total duration underwent periodic, relatively rapid, morphologic change that did not lead to lineage branching. Based on these findings, Malmgren and colleagues introduced a new mode of evolution and proposed to call it \"punctuated gradualism.\"\n\n\n1. Futuyma, D. J. (1997). Punctuated Equilibrium. In Evolutionary biology (pp. 137-139). Sunderland,Massachusetts: Sinauer Associates, Inc. \n\n2. Malmgren, B. A., Berggren, W. A., & Lohmann, G. P. (1983, October). Evidence for punctuated gradualism in the late Neogene Globorotalia tumida lineage of planktonic foraminifera .GeoScienceWorld, 9(3), 377-389. Abstract retrieved from http://paleobiol.geoscienceworld.org/cgi/content/abstract/9/4/377\n", "id": "6113380", "title": "Punctuated gradualism"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2559939", "text": "Phyletic gradualism\n\nPhyletic gradualism is a model of evolution which theorizes that most speciation is slow, uniform and gradual. When evolution occurs in this mode, it is usually by the steady transformation of a whole species into a new one (through a process called anagenesis). In this view no clear line of demarcation exists between an ancestral species and a descendant species, unless splitting occurs. The theory is contrasted with punctuated equilibrium.\n\nThe word \"phyletic\" derives from the Greek φυλετικός \"phūletikos\", which conveys the meaning of a line of descent. Phyletic gradualism contrasts with the theory of punctuated equilibrium, which proposes that most evolution occurs isolated in rare episodes of rapid evolution, when a single species splits into two distinct species, followed by a long period of stasis or non-change. These models both contrast with variable-speed evolution (\"variable speedism\"), which maintains that different species evolve at different rates, and that there is no reason to stress one rate of change over another.\n\nEvolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins argues that constant-rate gradualism is not present in the professional literature, thereby the term serves only as a straw-man for punctuated-equilibrium advocates. In his book \"The Blind Watchmaker\", Dawkins observes that Charles Darwin himself was not a constant-rate gradualist, as suggested by Niles Eldredge and Stephen Jay Gould. In the first edition of \"On the Origin of Species\", Darwin stated that \"Species of different genera and classes have not changed at the same rate, or in the same degree. In the oldest tertiary beds a few living shells may still be found in the midst of a multitude of extinct forms... The Silurian \"Lingula\" differs but little from the living species of this genus\". \n\n\"Lingula\" is among the few brachiopods surviving today but also known from fossils over 500 million years old. In the fifth edition of \"The Origin of Species\", Darwin wrote that \"the periods during which species have undergone modification, though long as measured in years, have probably been short in comparison with the periods during which they retain the same form\".\n\n\n", "id": "2559939", "title": "Phyletic gradualism"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11877", "text": "Gradualism\n\nGradualism, from Latin \"gradus\" (\"step\"), is a hypothesis, a theory or a tenet assuming that change comes about gradually or that variation is gradual in nature. Uniformitarianism, incrementalism, and reformism are similar concepts.\n\nIn the natural sciences, gradualism is the theory which holds that profound change is the cumulative product of slow but continuous processes, often contrasted with catastrophism. The theory was proposed in 1795 by James Hutton, a Scottish geologist, and was later incorporated into Charles Lyell's theory of uniformitarianism. Tenets from both theories were applied to biology and formed the basis of early evolutionary theory.\n\nCharles Darwin was influenced by Lyell's \"Principles of Geology\", which explained both uniformitarian methodology and theory. Using uniformitarianism, which states that one cannot make an appeal to any force or phenomenon which cannot presently be observed (see catastrophism), Darwin theorized that the evolutionary process must occur gradually, not in saltations, since saltations are not presently observed, and extreme deviations from the usual phenotypic variation would be more likely to be selected against.\n\nGradualism is often confused with the concept of phyletic gradualism. It is a term coined by Stephen Jay Gould and Niles Eldredge to contrast with their model of punctuated equilibrium, which is gradualist itself, but argues that most evolution is marked by long periods of evolutionary stability (called stasis), which is punctuated by rare instances of branching evolution.\n\nPhyletic gradualism is a model of evolution which theorizes that most speciation is slow, uniform and gradual. When evolution occurs in this mode, it is usually by the steady transformation of a whole species into a new one (through a process called anagenesis). In this view no clear line of demarcation exists between an ancestral species and a descendant species, unless splitting occurs.\n\nPunctuated gradualism is a microevolutionary hypothesis that refers to a species that has \"relative stasis over a considerable part of its total duration [and] underwent periodic, relatively rapid, morphologic change that did not lead to lineage branching\". It is one of the three common models of evolution. While the traditional model of palaeontology, the phylogenetic model, states that features evolved slowly without any direct association with speciation, the relatively newer and more controversial idea of punctuated equilibrium claims that major evolutionary changes don't happen over a gradual period but in localized, rare, rapid events of branching speciation. Punctuated gradualism is considered to be a variation of these models, lying somewhere in between the phyletic gradualism model and the punctuated equilibrium model. It states that speciation is not needed for a lineage to rapidly evolve from one equilibrium to another but may show rapid transitions between long-stable states.\n\nIn politics, gradualism is the hypothesis that social change can be achieved in small, discrete increments rather than in abrupt strokes such as revolutions or uprisings. Gradualism is one of the defining features of political liberalism and reformism. In Machiavellian politics, congressmen are pushed to espouse gradualism.\n\nIn socialist politics and within the socialist movement, the concept of gradualism is frequently distinguished from reformism, with the former insisting that short-term goals need to be formulated and implemented in such a way that they inevitably lead into long-term goals. It is most commonly associated with the libertarian socialist concept of dual power and is seen as a middle way between reformism and revolutionism.\n\nMartin Luther King, Jr. was opposed to the idea of gradualism as a method of eliminating segregation. The government wanted to try to integrate African-Americans and European-Americans slowly into the same society, but many believed it was a way for the government to put off actually doing anything about racial segregation:\n\nThis is no time to engage in the luxury of cooling off or to take the tranquilizing drug of gradualism. Now is the time to make real the promises of democracy.<br>–Martin Luther King Jr.'s \"I Have a Dream\" speech, delivered August 28, 1963 at the Lincoln Memorial in Washington DC\n\nIn linguistics, language change is seen as gradual, the product of chain reactions and subject to cyclic drift. The view that creole languages are the product of catastrophism is heavily disputed.\n\nGradualism has also been used in a religious sense, especially in the Catholic Church (specifically, in ethics and moral theology), to describe the view that certain individuals and families that make up a parish or community may be living at various points along a line extending from being in a state of mortal sin, to being at least minimally in the \"state of grace\" and able to receive the Eucharist, and to a level of greater holiness. This view teaches that the lives and relationships of people with morally unacceptable lifestyles may have some elements of good, even of great good, such as sacrificial love and consistent respect. It holds that virtues are not all-or-nothing propositions, and that elements of good may be found even in the context of morally unacceptable situations. Catholic clergy who espouse this view include the Bishop of San Diego, California, Robert W. McElroy, who in 2016 wrote: \n\nGradualism is the approach of certain schools of Buddhism and other Eastern philosophies (e.g. Theravada or Yoga), that enlightenment can be achieved step by step, through an arduous practice. The opposite approach, that insight is attained all at once, is called subitism. The debate on the issue was very important to the history of the development of Zen, which rejected gradualism, and to the establishment of the opposite approach within the Tibetan Buddhism, after the Debate of Samye. It was continued in other schools of Indian and Chinese philosophy.\n\nContradictorial gradualism is the paraconsistent treatment of fuzziness developed by Lorenzo Peña which regards true contradictions as situations wherein a state of affairs enjoys only partial existence.\n\nGradualism in social change implemented through reformist means is a moral principle to which the Fabian Society is committed. In a more general way, reformism is the assumption that gradual changes through and within existing institutions can ultimately change a society's fundamental economic system and political structures; and that an accumulation of reforms can lead to the emergence of an entirely different economic system and form of society than present-day capitalism. This hypothesis of social change grew out of opposition to revolutionary socialism, which contends that revolution is necessary for fundamental structural changes to occur.\n\nIn the terminology of NWO-related speculations, gradualism refers to the gradual implementation of a totalitarian world government.\n\n", "id": "11877", "title": "Gradualism"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24980", "text": "Punctuated equilibrium\n\nPunctuated equilibrium (also called punctuated equilibria) is a theory in evolutionary biology which proposes that once species appear in the fossil record the population will become stable, showing little evolutionary change for most of its geological history. This state of little or no morphological change is called \"stasis\". When significant evolutionary change occurs, the theory proposes that it is generally restricted to rare and geologically rapid events of branching speciation called cladogenesis. Cladogenesis is the process by which a species splits into two distinct species, rather than one species gradually transforming into another.\n\nPunctuated equilibrium is commonly contrasted against phyletic gradualism, the idea that evolution generally occurs uniformly and by the steady and gradual transformation of whole lineages (called anagenesis). In this view, evolution is seen as generally smooth and continuous.\n\nIn 1972, paleontologists Niles Eldredge and Stephen Jay Gould published a landmark paper developing their theory and called it \"punctuated equilibria\". Their paper built upon Ernst Mayr's model of geographic speciation, I. Michael Lerner's theories of developmental and genetic homeostasis, and their own empirical research. Eldredge and Gould proposed that the degree of gradualism commonly attributed to Charles Darwin is virtually nonexistent in the fossil record, and that stasis dominates the history of most fossil species.\n\nPunctuated equilibrium originated as a logical consequence of Ernst Mayr's concept of genetic revolutions by allopatric and especially peripatric speciation as applied to the fossil record. Although the sudden appearance of species and its relationship to speciation was proposed and identified by Mayr in 1954, historians of science generally recognize the 1972 Eldredge and Gould paper as the basis of the new paleobiological research program. Punctuated equilibrium differs from Mayr's ideas mainly in that Eldredge and Gould placed considerably greater emphasis on stasis, whereas Mayr was concerned with explaining the morphological discontinuity (or \"sudden jumps\") found in the fossil record. Mayr later complimented Eldredge and Gould's paper, stating that evolutionary stasis had been \"unexpected by most evolutionary biologists\" and that punctuated equilibrium \"had a major impact on paleontology and evolutionary biology.\"\n\nA year before their 1972 Eldredge and Gould paper, Niles Eldredge published a paper in the journal \"Evolution\" which suggested that gradual evolution was seldom seen in the fossil record and argued that Ernst Mayr's standard mechanism of allopatric speciation might suggest a possible resolution.\n\nThe Eldredge and Gould paper was presented at the Annual Meeting of the Geological Society of America in 1971. The symposium focused its attention on how modern microevolutionary studies could revitalize various aspects of paleontology and macroevolution. Tom Schopf, who organized that year's meeting, assigned Gould the topic of speciation. Gould recalls that \"Eldredge's 1971 publication [on Paleozoic trilobites] had presented the only new and interesting ideas on the paleontological implications of the subject—so I asked Schopf if we could present the paper jointly.\" According to Gould \"the ideas came mostly from Niles, with yours truly acting as a sounding board and eventual scribe. I coined the term \"punctuated equilibrium\" and wrote most of our 1972 paper, but Niles is the proper first author in our pairing of Eldredge and Gould.\" In his book \"Time Frames\" Eldredge recalls that after much discussion the pair \"each wrote roughly half. Some of the parts that would seem obviously the work of one of us were actually first penned by the other—I remember for example, writing the section on Gould's snails. Other parts are harder to reconstruct. Gould edited the entire manuscript for better consistency. We sent it in, and Schopf reacted strongly against it—thus signaling the tenor of the reaction it has engendered, though for shifting reasons, down to the present day.\"\n\nJohn Wilkins and Gareth Nelson have argued that French architect Pierre Trémaux proposed an \"anticipation of the theory of punctuated equilibrium of Gould and Eldredge.\"\n\nThe fossil record includes well documented examples of both phyletic gradualism and punctuational evolution. As such, much debate persists over the prominence of stasis in the fossil record. Before punctuated equilibrium, most evolutionists considered stasis to be rare or unimportant. The paleontologist George Gaylord Simpson, for example, believed that phyletic gradual evolution (called \"horotely\" in his terminology) comprised 90% of evolution. More modern studies, including a meta-analysis examining 58 published studies on speciation patterns in the fossil record showed that 71% of species exhibited stasis, and 63% were associated with punctuated patterns of evolutionary change. According to Michael Benton, \"it seems clear then that stasis is common, and that had not been predicted from modern genetic studies.\" A paramount example of evolutionary stasis is the fern \"Osmunda claytoniana\". Based on paleontological evidence it has remained unchanged, even at the level of fossilized nuclei and chromosomes, for at least 180 million years.\n\nWhen Eldredge and Gould published their 1972 paper, allopatric speciation was considered the \"standard\" model of speciation. This model was popularized by Ernst Mayr in his 1954 paper \"Change of genetic environment and evolution,\" and his classic volume \"Animal Species and Evolution\" (1963).\n\nAllopatric speciation suggests that species with large central populations are stabilized by their large volume and the process of gene flow. New and even beneficial mutations are diluted by the population's large size and are unable to reach fixation, due to such factors as constantly changing environments. If this is the case, then the transformation of whole lineages should be rare, as the fossil record indicates. Smaller populations on the other hand, which are isolated from the parental stock, are decoupled from the homogenizing effects of gene flow. In addition, pressure from natural selection is especially intense, as peripheral isolated populations exist at the outer edges of ecological tolerance. If most evolution happens in these rare instances of allopatric speciation then evidence of gradual evolution in the fossil record should be rare. This hypothesis was alluded to by Mayr in the closing paragraph of his 1954 paper:\n\nSome biologists have applied punctuated equilibrium to non-sexual species, like viruses, which cannot be stabilized by conventional gene flow. As time went on biologists like Gould moved away from wedding punctuated equilibrium to allopatric speciation, particularly as evidence accumulated in support of other modes of speciation. Gould was particularly attracted to Douglas Futuyma's work on the importance of reproductive isolating mechanisms.\n\nMany hypotheses have been proposed to explain the putative causes of stasis. Gould was initially attracted to I. Michael Lerner's theories of developmental and genetic homeostasis. However this hypothesis was rejected over time, as evidence accumulated against it. Other plausible mechanisms which have been suggested include: habitat tracking, stabilizing selection, the Stenseth-Maynard Smith stability hypothesis, constraints imposed by the nature of subdivided populations, normalizing clade selection, and koinophilia.\n\nEvidence for the existence of stasis has also been corroborated from the genetics of sibling species, species which are morphologically indistinguishable, but whose proteins have diverged sufficiently to suggest they have been separated for millions of years.\n\nAccording to Gould, \"stasis may emerge as the theory's most important contribution to evolutionary science.\" Philosopher Kim Sterelny in clarifying the meaning of stasis adds, \"In claiming that species typically undergo no further evolutionary change once speciation is complete, they are not claiming that there is no change at all between one generation and the next. Lineages do change. But the change between generations does not accumulate. Instead, over time, the species wobbles about its phenotypic mean. Jonathan Weiner's \"The Beak of the Finch\" describes this very process.\"\n\nPunctuated equilibrium has also been cited as contributing to the hypothesis that species are Darwinian individuals, and not just classes, thereby providing a stronger framework for a hierarchical theory of evolution.\n\nMuch confusion has arisen over what proponents of punctuated equilibrium actually argued, what mechanisms they advocated, how fast the punctuations were, what taxonomic scale their theory applied to, how revolutionary their claims were intended to be, and how punctuated equilibrium related to other ideas like quantum evolution, saltationism, and mass extinction.\n\nThe punctuational nature of punctuated equilibrium has engendered perhaps the most confusion over Eldredge and Gould's theory. Gould's sympathetic treatment of Richard Goldschmidt, the controversial geneticist who advocated the idea of \"hopeful monsters,\" led some biologists to conclude that Gould's punctuations were occurring in single-generation jumps. This interpretation has frequently been used by creationists to characterize the weakness of the paleontological record, and to portray contemporary evolutionary biology as advancing neo-saltationism. In an often quoted remark, Gould stated, \"Since we proposed punctuated equilibria to explain trends, it is infuriating to be quoted again and again by creationists—whether through design or stupidity, I do not know—as admitting that the fossil record includes no transitional forms. Transitional forms are generally lacking at the species level, but they are abundant between larger groups.\" Although there exist some debate over how long the punctuations last, supporters of punctuated equilibrium generally place the figure between 50,000 and 100,000 years.\n\nQuantum evolution was a controversial hypothesis advanced by Columbia University paleontologist George Gaylord Simpson, who was regarded by Gould as \"the greatest and most biologically astute paleontologist of the twentieth century.\" Simpson's conjecture was that according to the geological record, on very rare occasions evolution would proceed very rapidly to form entirely new families, orders, and classes of organisms. This hypothesis differs from punctuated equilibrium in several respects. First, punctuated equilibrium was more modest in scope, in that it was addressing evolution specifically at the species level. Simpson's idea was principally concerned with evolution at higher taxonomic groups. Second, Eldredge and Gould relied upon a different mechanism. Where Simpson relied upon a synergistic interaction between genetic drift and a shift in the adaptive fitness landscape, Eldredge and Gould relied upon ordinary speciation, particularly Ernst Mayr's concept of allopatric speciation. Lastly, and perhaps most significantly, quantum evolution took no position on the issue of stasis. Although Simpson acknowledged the existence of stasis in what he called the bradytelic mode, he considered it (along with rapid evolution) to be unimportant in the larger scope of evolution. In his \"Major Features of Evolution\" Simpson stated, \"Evolutionary change is so nearly the universal rule that a state of motion is, figuratively, normal in evolving populations. The state of rest, as in bradytely, is the exception and it seems that some restraint or force must be required to maintain it.\" Despite such differences between the two models, earlier critiques—from such eminent commentators as Sewall Wright as well as Simpson himself—have argued that punctuated equilibrium is little more than quantum evolution relabeled.\n\nPunctuated equilibrium is often portrayed to oppose the concept of gradualism, when it is actually a form of gradualism. This is because even though evolutionary change appears instantaneous between geological sedimentary layers, change is still occurring incrementally, with no great change from one generation to the next. To this end, Gould later commented that \"Most of our paleontological colleagues missed this insight because they had not studied evolutionary theory and either did not know about allopatric speciation or had not considered its translation to geological time. Our evolutionary colleagues also failed to grasp the implication(s), primarily because they did not think at geological scales\".\n\nRichard Dawkins dedicated a chapter in \"The Blind Watchmaker\" to correcting, in his view, the wide confusion regarding \"rates of change\". His first point is to argue that phyletic gradualism — understood in the sense that evolution proceeds at a single uniform rate of speed, called \"constant speedism\" by Dawkins — is a \"caricature of Darwinism\" and \"does not really exist\". His second argument, which follows from the first, is that once the caricature of \"constant speedism\" is dismissed, we are left with one logical alternative, which Dawkins terms \"variable speedism\". Variable speedism may also be distinguished one of two ways: \"\"discrete variable\" speedism\" and \"\"continuously variable\" speedism\". Eldredge and Gould, proposing that evolution jumps between stability and relative rapidity, are described as \"discrete variable speedists\", and \"in this respect they are genuinely radical.\" They assert that evolution generally proceeds in bursts, or not at all. \"Continuously variable speedists\", on the other hand, advance that \"evolutionary rates fluctuate continuously from very fast to very slow and stop, with all intermediates. They see no particular reason to emphasize certain speeds more than others. In particular, stasis, to them, is just an extreme case of ultra-slow evolution. To a punctuationist, there is something very special about stasis.\" Dawkins therefore commits himself here to an empirical claim about the geological record, in contrast to his earlier claim that \"The paleontological evidence can be argued about, and I am not qualified to judge it.\" It is this particular commitment that Eldredge and Gould have aimed to overturn.\n\nRichard Dawkins regards the apparent gaps represented in the fossil record to document migratory events rather than evolutionary events. According to Dawkins, evolution certainly occurred but \"probably gradually\" elsewhere. However, the punctuational equilibrium model may still be inferred from both the observation of stasis and examples of rapid and episodic speciation events documented in the fossil record.\n\nDawkins also emphasizes that punctuated equilibrium has been \"oversold by some journalists\", but partly due to Eldredge and Gould's \"later writings\". Dawkins contends that the hypothesis \"does not deserve a particularly large measure of publicity\". It is a \"minor gloss,\" an \"interesting but minor wrinkle on the surface of neo-Darwinian theory,\" and \"lies firmly within the neo-Darwinian synthesis\".\n\nIn his book \"Darwin's Dangerous Idea\", philosopher Daniel Dennett is especially critical of Gould's presentation of punctuated equilibrium. Dennett argues that Gould alternated between revolutionary and conservative claims, and that each time Gould made a revolutionary statement—or appeared to do so—he was criticized, and thus retreated to a traditional neo-Darwinian position. Gould responded to Dennett's claims in \"The New York Review of Books\", and in his technical volume \"The Structure of Evolutionary Theory\".\n\nLiterary scholar Heidi Scott argued that Gould's use of analogy and metaphor constitutes a non-scientific discourse attempting to validate a scientific hypothesis. She claims that Gould—particularly in his popular essays—uses a variety of strategies from literature, political science, and personal anecdotes to substantiate the general pattern of punctuated equilibrium in the context of natural science (long periods of stasis interrupted by rapid, catastrophic change). Gould responded that critics often made the mistake of confusing the context of discovery with the context of justification. While Gould is celebrated for the color and energy of his prose, as well as his interdisciplinary knowledge, critics such as Scott have concerns that the hypothesis has gained undeserved credence among non-scientists because of Gould's rhetorical skills. Philosopher John Lyne and biologist Henry Howe, in a more positive evaluation of Gould's rhetoric, state that \"re-analysis of existing fossil data has shown, to the increasing satisfaction of the paleontological community, that Eldredge and Gould were correct in identifying periods of evolutionary stasis which are interrupted by much shorter periods of evolutionary change.\"\n\nThe sudden appearance of most species in the geologic record and the lack of evidence of substantial gradual change in most species—from their initial appearance until their extinction—has , including by Charles Darwin who appealed to the imperfection of the record as the favored explanation. When presenting his ideas against the prevailing influences of catastrophism and progressive creationism, which envisaged species being supernaturally created at intervals, Darwin needed to forcefully stress the gradual nature of evolution in accordance with the gradualism promoted by his friend Charles Lyell. He privately expressed concern, noting in the margin of his 1844 \"Essay\", \"Better begin with this: If species really, after catastrophes, created in showers world over, my theory false.\"\n\nIt is often incorrectly assumed that he insisted that the rate of change must be constant, or nearly so, but even the first edition of \"On the Origin of Species\" states that \"Species of different genera and classes have not changed at the same rate, or in the same degree. In the oldest tertiary beds a few living shells may still be found in the midst of a multitude of extinct forms... The Silurian \"Lingula\" differs but little from the living species of this genus\". \"Lingula\" is among the few brachiopods surviving today but also known from fossils over 500 million years old. In the fourth edition (1866) of \"On the Origin of Species\" Darwin wrote that \"the periods during which species have undergone modification, though long as measured in years, have probably been short in comparison with the periods during which they retain the same form.\" Thus punctuationism in general is consistent with Darwin's conception of evolution.\n\nAccording to early versions of punctuated equilibrium, \"peripheral isolates\" are considered to be of critical importance for speciation. However, Darwin wrote, \"\"I can by no means agree\" ... that immigration and isolation are necessary elements... Although isolation is of great importance in the production of new species, on the whole I am inclined to believe that largeness of area is still more important, especially for the production of species which shall prove capable of enduring for a long period, and of spreading widely.\"\n\nThe importance of isolation in forming species had played a significant part in Darwin's early thinking, as shown in his \"Essay\" of 1844. But by the time he wrote the \"Origin\" he had downplayed its importance. He explained the reasons for his revised view as follows:\nThroughout a great and open area, not only will there be a greater chance of favourable variations, arising from the large number of individuals of the same species there supported, but the conditions of life are much more complex from the large number of already existing species; and if some of these species become modified and improved, others will have to be improved in a corresponding degree, or they will be exterminated. Each new form, also, as soon as it has been improved, will be able to spread over the open and continuous area, and will thus come into competition with many other forms ... the new forms produced on large areas, which have already been victorious over many competitors, will be those that will spread most widely, and will give rise to the greatest number of new varieties and species. They will thus play a more important role in the changing history of the organic world.\n\nThus punctuated equilibrium contradicts some of Darwin's ideas regarding the specific mechanisms of evolution, but generally accords with Darwin's theory of evolution by natural selection.\n\nRecent work in developmental biology has identified dynamical and physical mechanisms of tissue morphogenesis that may underlie abrupt morphological transitions during evolution. Consequently, consideration of mechanisms of phylogenetic change that have been found in reality to be non-gradual is increasingly common in the field of evolutionary developmental biology, particularly in studies of the origin of morphological novelty. A description of such mechanisms can be found in the multi-authored volume \"Origination of Organismal Form\" (MIT Press; 2003).\n\nIn linguistics, R. M. W. Dixon has proposed a punctuated equilibrium model for language histories, with reference particularly to the prehistory of the indigenous languages of Australia and his objections to the proposed Pama–Nyungan language family there. Although his model has raised considerable interest, it does not command majority support within linguistics.\n\nSeparately, recent work using computational phylogenetic methods claims to show that punctuational bursts play an important factor when languages split from one another, accounting for anywhere from 10 to 33% of the total divergence in vocabulary. Note that punctuational bursts also occurs in mythology in even greater proportions.\n\n\n", "id": "24980", "title": "Punctuated equilibrium"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43052", "text": "Quantum evolution\n\nQuantum evolution is a component of George Gaylord Simpson's multi-tempoed theory of evolution proposed to explain the rapid emergence of higher taxonomic groups in the fossil record. According to Simpson, evolutionary rates differ from group to group and even among closely related lineages. These different rates of evolutionary change were designated by Simpson as \"horotelic\" (medium tempo), \"bradytelic\" (slow tempo), and \"tachytelic\" (rapid tempo). \n\nQuantum evolution differed from these styles of change in that it involved a drastic shift in the adaptive zones of certain classes of animals. The word \"quantum\" therefore refers to an \"all-or-none reaction\", where transitional forms are particularly unstable, and thereby perish rapidly and completely. Although quantum evolution may happen at any taxonomic level, it plays a much larger role in \"the origin taxonomic units of relatively high rank, such as families, orders, and classes.\"\n\nUsage of the phrase \"quantum evolution\" in plants was apparently first articulated by Verne Grant in 1963 (pp. 458-459). He cited an earlier 1958 paper by Harlan Lewis and Peter H. Raven, wherein Grant asserted that Lewis and Raven gave a \"parallel\" definition of quantum evolution as defined by Simpson. Lewis and Raven postulated that species in the Genus Clarkia had a mode of speciation that resulted ...as a consequence of a rapid reorganization of the chromosomes due to the presence, at some time, of a genotype conducive to extensive chromosome breakage. A similar mode of origin by rapid reorganization of the chromosomes is suggested for the derivation of other species of Clarkia. In all of these examples the derivative populations grow adjacent to the parental species, which they resemble closely in morphology, but from which they are reproductively isolated because of multiple structural differences in their chromosomes. The spatial relationship of each parental species and its derivative suggests that differentiation has been recent. The repeated occurrence of the same pattern of differentiation in Clarkia suggests that a rapid reorganization of chromosomes has been an important mode of evolution in the genus. This rapid reorganization of the chromosomes is comparable to the systemic mutations proposed by Goldschmidt as a mechanism of macroevolution. In Clarkia, we have not observed marked changes in physiology and pattern of development that could be described as macroevolution. Reorganization of the genomes may, however, set the stage for subsequent evolution along a very different course from that of the ancestral populations\n\nHarlan Lewis refined this concept in a 1962 paper where he coined the term \"Catastrophic Speciation\" to describe this mode of speciation, since he theorized that the reductions in population size and consequent inbreeding that led to chromosomal rearrangements occurred in small populations that were subject to severe drought.\n\nLeslie D. Gottlieb in his 2003 summary of the subject in plants stated we can define quantum speciation as the budding off of a new and very different daughter species from a semi-isolated peripheral population of the ancestral species in a cross-fertilizing organism...as compared with geographical speciation, which is a gradual and conservative process, quantum speciation is rapid and radical in its phenotypic or genotypic effects or both. Gottlieb did not believe that sympatric speciation required disruptive selection to form a reproductive isolating barrier, as defined by Grant, and in fact Gottlieb stated that requiring disruptive selection was \"unnecessarily restrictive\" in identifying cases of sympatric speciation. In this 2003 paper Gottlieb summarized instances of quantum evolution in the plant species Clarkia, Layia, and Stephanomeria.\n\nAccording to Simpson (1944), quantum evolution resulted from Sewall Wright's model of random genetic drift. Simpson believed that major evolutionary transitions would arise when small populations, that were isolated and limited from gene flow, would fixate upon unusual gene combinations. This \"inadaptive phase\" (caused by genetic drift) would then (by natural selection) drive a deme population from one stable adaptive peak to another on the adaptive fitness landscape. However, in his \"Major Features of Evolution\" (1953) Simpson wrote that this mechanism was still controversial:\n\n\"whether prospective adaptation as prelude to quantum evolution arises adaptively or inadaptively. It was concluded above that it usually arises adaptively . . . . The precise role of, say, genetic drift in this process thus is largely speculative at present. It may have an essential part or none. It surely is not involved in all cases of quantum evolution, but there is a strong possibility that it is often involved. If or when it is involved, it is an initiating mechanism. Drift can only rarely, and only for lower categories, have completed the transition to a new adaptive zone.\"\n\nThis preference for adaptive over inadaptive forces led Stephen Jay Gould to call attention to the \"hardening of the Modern Synthesis\", a trend in the 1950s where adaptationism took precedence over the pluralism of mechanisms common in the 1930s and 40s.\n\nSimpson considered quantum evolution his crowning achievement, being \"perhaps the most important outcome of [my] investigation, but also the most controversial and hypothetical.\"\n\n\n\n", "id": "43052", "title": "Quantum evolution"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46459712", "text": "Rate of evolution\n\nThe rate of evolution is a variable of considerable interest in evolutionary biology. It concerns the limits of adaptation to natural environments as well as the limits of artificial selection.\n\nHumans have created a wide range of new species, and varieties within those species, of both domesticated animals and plants. Other human activity also impacts evolution. This has been achieved in a very short geological period of time, spanning only a few tens of thousands of years, and sometimes less. Maize, \"Zea mays\", for instance, is estimated to have been created in what is now known as Mexico in only a few thousand years, starting between about 7 000 and 12 000 years ago, from still uncertain origins. In the light of this extraordinarily rapid rate of evolution, through (prehistoric) artificial selection, George C. Williams and others, have remarked that:\n\n\"The question of evolutionary change in relation to available geological time is indeed a serious theoretical challenge, but the reasons are exactly the opposite of that inspired by most people’s intuition. Organisms in general have not done nearly as much evolving as we should reasonably expect. Long term rates of change, even in lineages of unusual rapid evolution, are almost always far slower than they theoretically could be. The basis for such expectation is to be found most clearly in observed rates of evolution under artificial selection, along with the often high rates of change in environmental conditions that must imply rapid change in intensity and direction of selection in nature\".\n\nEvolution is imposed on populations. It is not planned or striven for in some Lamarckist way. The mutations on which the process depends are random events, and, except for the \"silent mutations\" which do not affect the functionality or appearance of the carrier, are thus usually disadvantageous, and their chance of proving to be useful in the future is vanishingly small. \nTherefore, while a species or group might benefit from being able to adapt to a new environment by accumulating a wide range of genetic variation, this is to the detriment of the \"individuals\" who have to carry these mutations until a small, unpredictable minority of them ultimately contributes to such an adaptation. Thus, the \"capability\" to evolve is close to the discredited concept of group selection, since it would be selectively disadvantageous to the individual.\n\nIf sexual creatures avoid mates with strange or unusual characteristics, in the process called koinophilia, then mutations that affect the external appearance of their carriers will seldom be passed on to the next and subsequent generations. They will therefore seldom be tested by natural selection. Evolution is, therefore, effectively halted or slowed down considerably. The only mutations that can accumulate in a population are ones that have no noticeable effect on the outward appearance and functionality of their bearers (i.e., they are \"silent\" or \"neutral mutations\", which can be, and are, used to trace the relatedness and age of populations and species.)\n\nThis implies that evolution can only occur when mutant mates cannot be avoided, as a result of a severe scarcity of potential mates. This is most likely to occur in small, isolated communities. These occur most commonly on small islands, in remote valleys, lakes, river systems, or caves, or during the aftermath of a mass extinction. Under these circumstances, not only is the choice of mates severely restricted but population bottlenecks, founder effects, genetic drift and inbreeding cause rapid, random changes in the isolated population's genetic composition. Furthermore, hybridization with a related species trapped in the same isolate might introduce additional genetic changes. If an isolated population such as this survives its genetic upheavals, and subsequently expands into an unoccupied niche, or into a niche in which it has an advantage over its competitors, a new species, or subspecies, will have come in being. In geological terms this will be an abrupt event. A resumption of avoiding mutant mates will, thereafter, result, once again, in evolutionary stagnation.\n\nThus the fossil record of an evolutionary progression typically consists of species that suddenly appear, and ultimately disappear, in many cases close to a million years later, without any change in external appearance. One explanation of this is punctuated equilibrium; another, compatible with phyletic gradualism, is that periods of a few tens of thousands of years can barely be distinguished in the fossil record, implying that relatively rapid evolution will always appear as a sudden change in a sequence of fossils. Charles Darwin indeed noted in \"On the Origin of Species\" that periods of change would be short compared to the overall existence of a species. During each species' existence new species appear at random intervals, each lasting many hundreds of thousands of years before disappearing without a change in appearance. The exact relatedness of these concurrent species is generally impossible to determine, as seen in the evolution of modern humans.\n", "id": "46459712", "title": "Rate of evolution"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5103200", "text": "Darwin (unit)\n\nThe darwin (d) is a unit of evolutionary change, defined by J.B.S. Haldane in 1949. One darwin is defined to be an e-fold (about 2.718) change in a trait over one million years. Haldane named the unit after Charles Darwin.\n\nThe equation for calculating evolutionary change in darwins (formula_1) is:\n", "id": "5103200", "title": "Darwin (unit)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4131939", "text": "Saltation (biology)\n\nIn biology, saltation (from Latin, \"saltus\", \"leap\") is a sudden and large mutational change from one generation to the next, potentially causing single-step speciation. This was historically offered as an alternative to Darwinism. Some forms of mutationism were effectively saltationist, implying large discontinuous jumps.\n\nSpeciation, such as by polyploidy in plants, can sometimes be achieved in a single and in evolutionary terms sudden step. Evidence is accumulating for various forms of saltation in a variety of organisms.\n\nPrior to Charles Darwin most evolutionary scientists had been saltationists. Jean-Baptiste Lamarck was a gradualist but similar to other scientists of the period had written that saltational evolution was possible. Étienne Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire endorsed a theory of saltational evolution that \"monstrosities could become the founding fathers (or mothers) of new species by instantaneous transition from one form to the next.\" Geoffroy wrote that environmental pressures could produce sudden transformations to establish new species instantaneously. In 1864 Albert von Kölliker revived Geoffroy's theory that evolution proceeds by large steps, under the name of heterogenesis.\n\nWith the publication of \"On the Origin of Species\" in 1859 Charles Darwin had denied saltational evolution by writing that evolutionary transformation always proceeds gradually and never in jumps. Darwin insisted on slow accumulation of small steps in evolution and wrote \"natural selection acts solely by accumulating slight successive favourable variations, it can produce no great or sudden modification; it can act only by very short steps\". Darwin continued in this belief throughout his life.\n\nFrom 1860 to 1880 saltation had a minority interest but by 1890 had become a major interest to scientists. In their paper on evolutionary theories in the 20th century (Levit \"et al\". 2008) wrote:\n\nThe advocates of saltationism deny the Darwinian idea of slowly and gradually growing divergence of character as the only source of evolutionary progress. They would not necessarily completely deny gradual variation, but claim that cardinally new ‘body plans’ come into being as a result of saltations (sudden, discontinuous and crucial changes, for example, the series of macromutations). The latter are responsible for the sudden appearance of new higher taxa including classes and orders, while small variation is supposed to be responsible for the fine adaptations below the species level.\n\nIn the early 20th century a mechanism of saltation was proposed as large mutations. It was seen as a much faster alternative to the Darwinian concept of a gradual process of small random variations being acted on by natural selection. It was popular with early geneticists such as Hugo de Vries, who along with Carl Correns helped rediscover Gregor Mendel's laws of inheritance in 1900, William Bateson, a British zoologist who switched to genetics, and early in his career Thomas Hunt Morgan. Some of these geneticists developed it into the mutation theory of evolution. There was also a debate over accounts of the evolution of mimicry and if they could be explained by gradualism or saltation. The geneticist Reginald Punnett supported a saltational theory in his book \"Mimicry in Butterflies\" (1915).\n\nThe mutation theory of evolution held that species went through periods of rapid mutation, possibly as a result of environmental stress, that could produce multiple mutations, and in some cases completely new species, in a single generation. This mutationist view of evolution was later replaced by the reconciliation of Mendelian genetics with natural selection into a gradualistic framework for the neo-Darwinian synthesis. It was the emergence of population thinking in evolution which forced many scientists to adopt gradualism in the early 20th century. According to Ernst Mayr, it wasn't until the development of population genetics in the neo-Darwinian synthesis in the 1940s that demonstrated the explanatory power of natural selection that saltational views of evolution were largely abandoned.\n\nSaltation was originally denied by the \"modern synthesis\" school of neo-Darwinism which favoured gradual evolution but has since been accepted due to recent evidence in evolutionary biology (see the current status section). In recent years there are some prominent proponents of saltation, including Carl Woese. Woese, and colleagues, suggested that the absence of RNA signature continuum between domains of bacteria, archaea, and eukarya constitutes a primary indication that the three primary organismal lineages materialized via one or more major evolutionary saltations from some universal ancestral state involving dramatic change in cellular organization that was significant early in the evolution of life, but in complex organisms gave way to the generally accepted Darwinian mechanisms. The geneticist Barbara McClintock introduced the idea of \"jumping genes\", chromosome transpositions that can produce rapid changes in the genome.\n\nSaltational speciation, also known as abrupt speciation, is the discontinuity in a lineage that occurs through genetic mutations, chromosomal aberrations or other evolutionary mechanisms that cause reproductively isolated individuals to establish a new species population. Polyploidy, karyotypic fission, symbiogenesis and lateral gene transfer are possible mechanisms for saltational speciation.\n\nThe botanist John Christopher Willis proposed an early saltationist theory of evolution. He held that species were formed by large mutations, not gradual evolution by natural selection.\n\nThe German geneticist Richard Goldschmidt was the first scientist to use the term \"hopeful monster\". Goldschmidt thought that small gradual changes could not bridge the hypothetical divide between microevolution and macroevolution. In his book \"The Material Basis of Evolution\" (1940) he wrote \"the change from species to species is not a change involving more and more additional atomistic changes, but a complete change of the primary pattern or reaction system into a new one, which afterwards may again produce intraspecific variation by micromutation.\" Goldschmidt believed the large changes in evolution were caused by macromutations (large mutations). His ideas about macromutations became known as the hopeful monster hypothesis which is considered a type of saltational evolution.\n\nGoldschmidt's thesis however was universally rejected and widely ridiculed within the biological community, which favored the neo-Darwinian explanations of R.A. Fisher, J. B. S. Haldane and Sewall Wright. However, there has been a recent interest in the ideas of Goldschmidt in the field of evolutionary developmental biology as some scientists are convinced he was not entirely wrong.\n\nOtto Schindewolf, a German paleontologist, also supported macromutations as part of his evolutionary theory. He was known for presenting an alternative interpretation of the fossil record based on his ideas of orthogenesis, saltational evolution and extraterrestrial impacts opposed to gradualism but abandoned the view of macromutations in later publications.\n\nSøren Løvtrup, a biochemist and embryologist from Denmark, advocated a similar hypothesis of macromutation to Goldschmidt's in 1974. Lovtrup believed that macromutations interfered with various epigenetic processes, that is, those which affect the causal processes in biological development. This is in contrast to the gradualistic theory of micromutations of Neo-Darwinism, which claims that evolutionary innovations are generally the result of accumulation of numerous very slight modifications. Lovtrup also rejected the punctuated equilibria of Stephen Gould and Niles Eldredge, claiming it was a form of gradualism and not a macromutation theory. Lovtrup defended many of Darwin's critics including Schindewolf, Mivart, Goldschmidt, and Himmelfarb. Mae Wan Ho described Lovtrup's theory as similar to the hopeful monster theory of Richard Goldschmidt.\n\nGoldschmidt presented two mechanisms for how hopeful monsters might work. One mechanism, involved “systemic mutations”, rejected the classical gene concept and is no longer considered by modern science; however, his second mechanism involved “developmental macromutations” in “rate genes” or “controlling genes” that change early development and thus cause large effects in the adult phenotype. These kind of mutations are similar to the ones considered in contemporary evolutionary developmental biology.\n\nOn the subject of Goldschmidt Donald Prothero in his book \"Evolution: What the Fossils Say and Why It Matters\" (2007) wrote:\n\nThe past twenty years have vindicated Goldschmidt to some degree. With the discovery of the importance of regulatory genes, we realize that he was ahead of his time in focusing on the importance of a few genes controlling big changes in the organisms, not small-scales changes in the entire genome as neo-Darwinians thought. In addition, the hopeful monster problem is not so insurmountable after all. Embryology has shown that if you affect an entire population of developing embryos with a stress (such as a heat shock) it can cause many embryos to go through the same new pathway of embryonic development, and then they all become hopeful monsters when they reach reproductive age.\n\nIn 2008 evolutionary biologist Olivia Judson in her article \"The Monster Is Back, and It’s Hopeful\" listed some examples which may support the hopeful monster hypothesis and an article published in the journal Nature in 2010 titled \"Evolution: Revenge of the Hopeful Monster\" reported that studies in stickleback populations in a British Columbia lake and bacteria populations in a Michigan lab have shown that large individual genetic changes can have vast effects on organisms \"without dooming it to the evolutionary rubbish heap\". According to the article \"Single-gene changes that confer a large adaptive value do happen: they are not rare, they are not doomed and, when competing with small-effect mutations, they tend to win. But small-effect mutations still matter — a lot. They provide essential fine-tuning and sometimes pave the way for explosive evolution to follow.\"\n\nA paper by (Page \"et al.\" 2010) have written that the Mexican axolotl (\"Ambystoma mexicanum\") could be classified as a hopeful monster as it exhibits an adaptive and derived mode of development that has evolved rapidly and independently among tiger salamanders. According to the paper there has been an interest in aspects of the hopeful monster hypothesis in recent years:\n\nGoldschmidt proposed that mutations occasionally yield individuals within populations that deviate radically from the norm and referred to such individuals as \"hopeful monsters\". If the novel phenotypes of hopeful monsters arise under the right environmental circumstances, they may become fixed, and the population will found a new species. While this idea was discounted during the Modern synthesis, aspects of the hopeful monster hypothesis have been substantiated in recent years. For example, it is clear that dramatic changes in phenotype can occur from few mutations of key developmental genes and phenotypic differences among species often map to relatively few genetic factors. These findings are motivating renewed interest in the study of hopeful monsters and the perspectives they can provide about the evolution of development. In contrast to mutants that are created in the lab, hopeful monsters have been shaped by natural selection and are therefore more likely to reveal mechanisms of adaptive evolution.\n\nGünter Theißen, a German professor of genetics, has classified homeotic mutants as hopeful monsters and documented many examples of animal and plant lineages that may have originated as hopeful monsters. American biologist Michael Freeling has proposed \"balanced gene drive\" as a saltational mechanism in the mutationist tradition, which could explain trends involving morphological complexity in plant and animal eukaryotic lineages.\n\nExamples of saltational evolution include cases of stabilized hybrids that can reproduce without crossing (such as allotetraploids) and cases of symbiogenesis. Both gene duplication and lateral gene transfer have the capacity to bring about relatively large changes that are saltational. Evidence of phenotypic saltation has been found in the centipede and some scientists have suggested there is evidence for independent instances of saltational evolution in Sphinx moths. Saltational changes have occurred in the buccal cavity of the roundworm \"Caenorhabditis elegans\". Some processes of epigenetic inheritance can also produce changes that are saltational. There has been a controversy over whether mimicry in butterflies and other insects can be explained by gradual or saltational evolution. According to Norrström (2006) there is evidence for saltation in some cases of mimicry. The endosymbiotic theory is considered to be a type of saltational evolution. Symonds and Elgar, 2004 have suggested that pheromone evolution in bark beetles is characterized by large saltational shifts. The mode of evolution of sex pheromones in \"Bactrocera\" has occurred by rapid saltational changes associated with speciation followed by gradual divergence thereafter.\n\nSaltational speciation has been recognized in the genus \"Clarkia\" (Lewis, 1966). It has been suggested (Carr, 1980, 2000) that the \"Calycadenia pauciflora\" could have originated directly from an ancestral race through a single saltational event involving multiple chromosome breaks. Specific cases of homeosis in flowers can be caused by saltational evolution. In a study of divergent orchid flowers (Bateman and DiMichele, 2002) wrote how simple homeotic morphs in a population can lead to newly established forms that become fixed and ultimately lead to new species. They described the transformation as a saltational evolutionary process, where a mutation of key developmental genes leads to a profound phenotypic change, producing a new evolutionary lineage within a species. Polyploidy (most common in plants but not unknown in animals) is considered a type of saltation. Polyploidy meets the basic criteria of saltation in that a significant change (in gene numbers) results in speciation in just one generation.\n\nReviewing the history of macroevolutionary theories, the American evolutionary biologist Douglas J. Futuyma notes that since 1970, two very different alternatives to Darwinian gradualism have been proposed, both by Stephen Jay Gould: mutationism, and punctuated equilibria. Gould's macromutation theory gave a nod to his predecessor with an envisaged \"Goldschmidt break\" between evolution within a species and speciation. His advocacy of Goldschmidt was attacked with \"highly unflattering comments\" by B. Charlesworth and Templeton. Futuyma concludes, following other biologists reviewing the field such as K.Sterelny and A. Minelli, that essentially all the claims of evolution driven by large mutations could be explained within the Darwinian evolutionary synthesis.\n\n\n", "id": "4131939", "title": "Saltation (biology)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=812109", "text": "Evolvability\n\nEvolvability is defined as the capacity of a system for adaptive evolution. Evolvability is the ability of a population of organisms to not merely generate genetic diversity, but to generate \"adaptive\" genetic diversity, and thereby evolve through natural selection.\n\nIn order for a biological organism to evolve by natural selection, there must be a certain minimum probability that new, heritable variants are beneficial. Random mutations, unless they occur in DNA sequences with no function, are expected to be mostly detrimental. Beneficial mutations are always rare, but if they are too rare, then adaptation cannot occur. Early failed efforts to evolve computer programs by random mutation and selection showed that evolvability is not a given, but depends on the representation of the program. Analogously, the evolvability of organisms depends on their genotype–phenotype map. This means that biological genomes are structured in ways that make beneficial changes less unlikely than they would otherwise be. This has been taken as evidence that evolution has created not just fitter organisms, but populations of organisms that are better able to evolve.\n\nAndreas Wagner describes two definitions of evolvability. According to the first definition, a biological system is evolvable:\n\nAccording to the second definition, a biological system is evolvable:\n\nFor example, consider an enzyme with multiple alleles in the population. Each allele catalyzes the same reaction, but with a different level of activity. However, even after millions of years of evolution, exploring many sequences with similar function, no mutation might exist that gives this enzyme the ability to catalyze a different reaction. Thus, although the enzyme's activity is evolvable in the first sense, that does not mean that the enzyme's function is evolvable in the second sense. However, every system evolvable in the second sense must also be evolvable in the first.\n\nPigliucci recognizes three classes of definition, depending on timescale. The first corresponds to Wagner's first, and represents the very short timescales that are described by quantitative genetics. He divides Wagner's second definition into two categories, one representing the intermediate timescales that can be studied using population genetics, and one representing exceedingly rare long-term innovations of form.\n\nPigliucci's second definition of evolvability includes Altenberg's quantitative concept of evolvability, being not a single number, but the entire upper tail of the fitness distribution of the offspring produced by the population. This quantity was considered a \"local\" property of the instantaneous state of a population, and its integration over the population's evolutionary trajectory, and over many possible populations, would be necessary to give a more global measure of evolvability.\n\nMore heritable phenotypic variation means more evolvability. While mutation is the ultimate source of heritable variation, its permutations and combinations also make a big difference. Sexual reproduction generates more variation (and thereby evolvability) relative to asexual reproduction (see evolution of sexual reproduction). Evolvability is further increased by generating more variation when an organism is stressed, and thus likely to be less well adapted, but less variation when an organism is doing well. The amount of variation generated can be adjusted in many different ways, for example via the mutation rate, via the probability of sexual vs. asexual reproduction, via the probability of outcrossing vs. inbreeding, via dispersal, and via access to previously cryptic variants through the switching of an evolutionary capacitor. A large population size increases the influx of novel mutations each generation.\n\nRather than creating more phenotypic variation, some mechanisms increase the intensity and effectiveness with which selection acts on existing phenotypic variation. For example:\n\nThe relationship between robustness and evolvability depends on whether recombination can be ignored. Recombination can generally be ignored in asexual populations and for traits affected by single genes.\n\nRobustness will not increase evolvability in the first sense. In organisms with a high level of robustness, mutations will have smaller phenotypic effects than in organisms with a low level of robustness. Thus, robustness reduces the amount of heritable genetic variation on which selection can act. However, robustness may allow exploration of large regions of genotype space, increasing evolvability according to the second sense. Even without genetic diversity, some genotypes have higher evolvability than others, and selection for robustness can increase the \"neighborhood richness\" of phenotypes that can be accessed from the same starting genotype by mutation. For example, one reason many proteins are less robust to mutation is that they have marginal thermodynamic stability, and most mutations reduce this stability further. Proteins that are more thermostable can tolerate a wider range of mutations and are more evolvable. For polygenic traits, neighborhood richness contributes more to evolvability than does genetic diversity or \"spread\" across genotype space.\n\nTemporary robustness, or canalisation, may lead to the accumulation of significant quantities of cryptic genetic variation. In a new environment or genetic background, this variation may be revealed and sometimes be adaptive.\n\nWhen mutational robustness exists, many mutants will persist in a cryptic state. Mutations tend to fall into two categories, having either a very bad effect or very little effect: few mutations fall somewhere in between. Sometimes, these mutations will not be completely invisible, but still have rare effects, with very low penetrance. When this happens, natural selection weeds out the very bad mutations, while leaving the others relatively unaffected. While evolution has no \"foresight\" to know which environment will be encountered in the future, some mutations cause major disruption to a basic biological process, and will never be adaptive in any environment. Screening these out in advance leads to preadapted stocks of cryptic genetic variation.\n\nAnother way that phenotypes can be explored, prior to strong genetic commitment, is through learning. An organism that learns gets to \"sample\" several different phenotypes during its early development, and later sticks to whatever worked best. Later in evolution, the optimal phenotype can be genetically assimilated so it becomes the default behavior rather than a rare behavior. This is known as the Baldwin effect, and it can increase evolvability.\n\nLearning biases phenotypes in a beneficial direction. But an exploratory flattening of the fitness landscape can also increase evolvability even when it has no direction, for example when the flattening is a result of random errors in molecular and/or developmental processes. This increase in evolvability can happen when evolution is faced with crossing a \"valley\" in an adaptive landscape. This means that two mutations exist that are deleterious by themselves, but beneficial in combination. These combinations can evolve more easily when the landscape is first flattened, and the discovered phenotype is then fixed by genetic assimilation.\n\nIf every mutation affected every trait, then a mutation that was an improvement for one trait would be a disadvantage for other traits. This means that almost no mutations would be beneficial overall. But if pleiotropy is restricted to within functional modules, then mutations affect only one trait at a time, and adaptation is much less constrained. In a modular gene network, for example, a gene that induces a limited set of other genes that control a specific trait under selection may evolve more readily than one that also induces other gene pathways controlling traits not under selection. Individual genes also exhibit modularity. A mutation in one cis-regulatory element of a gene's promoter region may allow the expression of the gene to be altered only in specific tissues, developmental stages, or environmental conditions rather than changing gene activity in the entire organism simultaneously.\n\nWhile variation yielding high evolvability could be useful in the long term, in the short term most of that variation is likely to be a disadvantage. For example, naively it would seem that increasing the mutation rate via a mutator allele would increase evolvability. But as an extreme example, if the mutation rate is too high then all individuals will be dead or at least carry a heavy mutation load. Short-term selection for low variation most of the time is usually thought likely to be more powerful than long-term selection for evolvability, making it difficult for natural selection to cause the evolution of evolvability. Other forces of selection also affect the generation of variation; for example, mutation and recombination may in part be byproducts of mechanisms to cope with DNA damage.\n\nWhen recombination is low, mutator alleles may still sometimes hitchhike on the success of adaptive mutations that they cause. In this case, selection can take place at the level of the lineage. This may explain why mutators are often seen during experimental evolution of microbes. Mutator alleles can also evolve more easily when they only increase mutation rates in nearby DNA sequences, not across the whole genome: this is known as a contingency locus.\n\nThe evolution of evolvability is less controversial if it occurs via the evolution of sexual reproduction, or via the tendency of variation-generating mechanisms to become more active when an organism is stressed. The yeast prion [PSI+] may also be an example of the evolution of evolvability through evolutionary capacitance. An evolutionary capacitor is a switch that turns genetic variation on and off. This is very much like bet-hedging the risk that a future environment will be similar or different. Theoretical models also predict the evolution of evolvability via modularity. When the costs of evolvability are sufficiently short-lived, more evolvable lineages may be the most successful in the long-term. However, the hypothesis that evolvability is an adaptation is often rejected in favor of alternative hypotheses, e.g. minimization of costs.\n\nThe study of evolvability has fundamental importance for understanding very long term evolution of protein superfamilies and organism phyla and kingdoms. A thorough understanding of the details of long term evolution will likely form part of the Extended Evolutionary Synthesis (the update to the Modern Synthesis). In addition, these phenomena have two main practical applications. For protein engineering we wish to increase evolvability, and in medicine and agriculture we wish to decrease it.\n\nFirstly, for protein engineering it is important to understand the factors that determine how much a protein function can be altered. In particular, both rational design and directed evolution approaches aim to create changes rapidly through mutations with large effects. Such mutations, however, commonly destroy enzyme function or at least reduce tolerance to further mutations. Identifying evolvable proteins and manipulating their evolvability is becoming increasingly necessary in order to achieve ever larger functional modification of enzymes.\n\nMany human diseases are not static phenomena, but capable of evolution. Viruses, bacteria, fungi and cancers evolve to be resistant to host immune defences, as well as pharmaceutical drugs. These same problems occur in agriculture with pesticide and herbicide resistance. It is possible that we are facing the end of the effective life of most of available antibiotics and predicting the evolution and evolvability of our pathogens and devising strategies to slow or circumvent it is requiring deeper knowledge of the complex forces driving evolution at the molecular level.\n\n", "id": "812109", "title": "Evolvability"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25308", "text": "Quasispecies model\n\nThe quasispecies model is a description of the process of the Darwinian evolution of certain self-replicating entities within the framework of physical chemistry. Put simply, a quasispecies is a large group or \"cloud\" of related genotypes that exist in an environment of high mutation rate, where a large fraction of offspring are expected to contain one or more mutations relative to the parent. This is in contrast to a species, which from an evolutionary perspective is a more-or-less stable single genotype, most of the offspring of which will be genetically accurate copies.\n\nIt is useful mainly in providing a qualitative understanding of the evolutionary processes of self-replicating macromolecules such as RNA or DNA or simple asexual organisms such as bacteria or viruses (see also viral quasispecies), and is helpful in explaining something of the early stages of the origin of life. Quantitative predictions based on this model are difficult because the parameters that serve as its input are impossible to obtain from actual biological systems. The quasispecies model was put forward by Manfred Eigen and Peter Schuster based on initial work done by Eigen.\n\nWhen evolutionary biologists describe competition between species, they generally assume that each species is a single genotype whose descendants are mostly accurate copies. (Such genotypes are said to have a high reproductive \"fidelity\".) Evolutionarily, we are interested in the behavior and fitness of that one species or genotype over time.\n\nSome organisms or genotypes, however, may exist in circumstances of low fidelity, where most descendants contain one or more mutations. A group of such genotypes is constantly changing, so discussions of which single genotype is the most fit become meaningless. Importantly, if many closely related genotypes are only one mutation away from each other, then genotypes in the group can mutate back and forth into each other. For example, with one mutation per generation, a child of the sequence AGGT could be AGTT, and a grandchild could be AGGT again. Thus we can envision a \"cloud\" of related genotypes that is rapidly mutating, with sequences going back and forth among different points in the cloud. Though the proper definition is mathematical, that cloud, roughly speaking, is a quasispecies.\n\nQuasispecies behavior exists for large numbers of individuals existing at a certain (high) range of mutation rates.\n\nIn a species, though reproduction may be mostly accurate, periodic mutations will give rise to one or more competing genotypes. If a mutation results in greater replication and survival, the mutant genotype may out-compete the parent genotype and come to dominate the species. Thus, the individual genotypes (or species) may be seen as the units on which selection acts and biologists will often speak of a single genotype's fitness.\n\nIn a quasispecies, however, mutations are ubiquitous and so the fitness of an individual genotype becomes meaningless: if one particular mutation generates a boost in reproductive success, it can't amount to much because that genotype's offspring are unlikely to be accurate copies with the same properties. Instead, what matters is the \"connectedness\" of the cloud. For example, the sequence AGGT has 12 (3+3+3+3) possible single point mutants AGGA, AGGG, and so on. If 10 of those mutants are viable genotypes that may reproduce (and some of whose offspring or grandchildren may mutate back into AGGT again), we would consider that sequence a well-connected node in the cloud. If instead only two of those mutants are viable, the rest being lethal mutations, then that sequence is poorly connected and most of its descendants will not reproduce. The analog of fitness for a quasispecies is the tendency of nearby relatives within the cloud to be well-connected, meaning that more of the mutant descendants will be viable and give rise to further descendants within the cloud.\n\nWhen the fitness of a single genotype becomes meaningless because of the high rate of mutations, the cloud as a whole or quasispecies becomes the natural unit of selection.\n\nQuasispecies represents the evolution of high-mutation-rate viruses such as HIV and sometimes single genes or molecules within the genomes of other organisms. Quasispecies models have also been proposed by Jose Fontanari and Emmanuel David Tannenbaum to model the evolution of sexual reproduction. Quasispecies was also shown in compositional replicators (based on the Gard model for abiogenesis) and was also suggested to be applicable to describe cell's replication, which amongst other things requires the maintenance and evolution of the internal composition of the parent and bud.\n\nThe model rests on four assumptions:\n\nIn the quasispecies model, mutations occur through errors made in the process of copying already existing sequences. Further, selection arises because different types of sequences tend to replicate at different rates, which leads to the suppression of sequences that replicate more slowly in favor of sequences that replicate faster. However, the quasispecies model does not predict the ultimate extinction of all but the fastest replicating sequence. Although the sequences that replicate more slowly cannot sustain their abundance level by themselves, they are constantly replenished as sequences that replicate faster mutate into them. At equilibrium, removal of slowly replicating sequences due to decay or outflow is balanced by replenishing, so that even relatively slowly replicating sequences can remain present in finite abundance.\n\nDue to the ongoing production of mutant sequences, selection does not act on single sequences, but on mutational \"clouds\" of closely related sequences, referred to as \"quasispecies\". In other words, the evolutionary success of a particular sequence depends not only on its own replication rate, but also on the replication rates of the mutant sequences it produces, and on the replication rates of the sequences of which it is a mutant. As a consequence, the sequence that replicates fastest may even disappear completely in selection-mutation equilibrium, in favor of more slowly replicating sequences that are part of a quasispecies with a higher average growth rate. Mutational clouds as predicted by the quasispecies model have been observed in RNA viruses and in \"in vitro\" RNA replication.\n\nThe mutation rate and the general fitness of the molecular sequences and their neighbors is crucial to the formation of a quasispecies. If the mutation rate is zero, there is no exchange by mutation, and each sequence is its own species. If the mutation rate is too high, exceeding what is known as the error threshold, the quasispecies will break down and be dispersed over the entire range of available sequences.\n\nA simple mathematical model for a quasispecies is as follows: let there be formula_1 possible sequences and let there be formula_2 organisms with sequence \"i\". Let's say that each of these organisms asexually gives rise to formula_3 offspring. Some are duplicates of their parent, having sequence \"i\", but some are mutant and have some other sequence. Let the mutation rate formula_4 correspond to the probability that a \"j\" type parent will produce an \"i\" type organism. Then the expected fraction of offspring generated by \"j\" type organisms that would be \"i\" type organisms is formula_5,\n\nwhere formula_6.\n\nThen the total number of \"i\"-type organisms after the first round of reproduction, given as formula_7, is\n\nSometimes a death rate term formula_9 is included so that:\n\nwhere formula_11 is equal to 1 when i=j and is zero otherwise. Note that the \"n-th\" generation can be found by just taking the \"n-th\" power of W substituting it in place of W in the above formula.\n\nThis is just a system of linear equations. The usual way to solve such a system is to first diagonalize the W matrix. Its diagonal entries will be eigenvalues corresponding to certain linear combinations of certain subsets of sequences which will be eigenvectors of the W matrix. These subsets of sequences are the quasispecies. Assuming that the matrix W is a primitive matrix (irreducible and aperiodic), then after very many generations only the eigenvector with the largest eigenvalue will prevail, and it is this quasispecies that will eventually dominate. The components of this eigenvector give the relative abundance of each sequence at equilibrium.\n\nW being primitive means that for some integer formula_12, that the formula_13 power of W is > 0, i.e. all the entries are positive. If W is primitive then each type can, through a sequence of mutations (i.e. powers of W) mutate into all the other types after some number of generations. W is not primitive if it is periodic, where the population can perpetually cycle through different disjoint sets of compositions, or if it is reducible, where the dominant species (or quasispecies) that develops can depend on the initial population, as is the case in the simple example given below.\n\nThe quasispecies formulae may be expressed as a set of linear differential equations. If we consider the difference between the new state formula_7 and the old state formula_2 to be the state change over one moment of time, then we can state that the time derivative of formula_2 is given by this difference, formula_17 we can write:\n\nThe quasispecies equations are usually expressed in terms of concentrations formula_19 where\n\nThe above equations for the quasispecies then become for the discrete version:\n\nor, for the continuum version:\n\nThe quasispecies concept can be illustrated by a simple system consisting of 4 sequences. Sequences [0,0], [0,1], [1,0], and [1,1] are numbered 1, 2, 3, and 4, respectively. Let's say the [0,0] sequence never mutates and always produces a single offspring. Let's say the other 3 sequences all produce, on average, formula_24 replicas of themselves, and formula_25 of each of the other two types, where formula_26. The W matrix is then:\n\nThe diagonalized matrix is:\n\nAnd the eigenvectors corresponding to these eigenvalues are:\n\nOnly the eigenvalue formula_29 is more than unity. For the n-th generation, the corresponding eigenvalue will be formula_30 and so will increase without bound as time goes by. This eigenvalue corresponds to the eigenvector [0,1,1,1], which represents the quasispecies consisting of sequences 2, 3, and 4, which will be present in equal numbers after a very long time. Since all population numbers must be positive, the first two quasispecies are not legitimate. The third quasispecies consists of only the non-mutating sequence 1. It's seen that even though sequence 1 is the most fit in the sense that it reproduces more of itself than any other sequence, the quasispecies consisting of the other three sequences will eventually dominate (assuming that the initial population was not homogeneous of the sequence 1 type).\n\n", "id": "25308", "title": "Quasispecies model"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1124336", "text": "Foster's rule\n\nFoster's rule, also known as the island rule or the island effect, is an ecogeographical rule in evolutionary biology stating that members of a species get smaller or bigger depending on the resources available in the environment. For example, it is known that pygmy mammoths evolved from normal mammoths on small islands. Similar evolutionary paths have been observed in elephants, hippopotamuses, boas, deer (such as Key deer) and humans.\n\nThe rule was first stated by J. Bristol Foster in 1964. In it, he compared 116 island species to their mainland varieties. He proposed that certain island creatures evolved into larger versions of themselves (insular gigantism) while others became smaller versions of themselves (insular dwarfism). He proposed the simple explanation that smaller creatures get larger when predation pressure is relaxed because of the absence of some of the predators of the mainland, and larger creatures become smaller when food resources are limited because of land area constraints.\n\nThe idea was expanded upon in \"The Theory of Island Biogeography\", by Robert MacArthur and Edward O. Wilson. In 1978, Ted J. Case published a longer paper on the topic in the journal \"Ecology\".\n\n", "id": "1124336", "title": "Foster's rule"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1261011", "text": "Evolutionary ecology\n\nEvolutionary ecology lies at the intersection of ecology and evolutionary biology. It approaches the study of ecology in a way that explicitly considers the evolutionary histories of species and the interactions between them. Conversely, it can be seen as an approach to the study of evolution that incorporates an understanding of the interactions between the species under consideration. The main subfields of evolutionary ecology are life history evolution, sociobiology (the evolution of social behavior), the evolution of inter specific relations (cooperation, predator–prey interactions, parasitism, mutualism) and the evolution of biodiversity and of communities.\n\nEvolutionary ecology mostly considers two things how interactions (among species and between species and their physical environment) shape species through selection and adaptation, and the consequences of the resulting evolutionary\n\nEcological genetics tie into evolutionary ecology through the study of how traits evolve in natural populations. Ecologists are concerned with how the environment and timeframe leads to genes becoming dominant. Organisms must continually adapt in order to survive in natural habitats. Genes define which organisms survive and which will die out. When organisms develop different genetic variations, even though they stem from the same species, it is known as polymorphism. Organisms that pass on beneficial genes continue to evolve their species to have an advantage inside of their niche.\n\nBiomes are environments which house a variety of plants and animals that have adapted to the rainfall and temperature natural to said environment. There are eight main biomes: tropical forests, savannas, deserts, grasslands, temperate forests, mediterranean, coniferous forests, and tundras. Each biome has different organisms present that have adapted to the environment so as to retain their niche. Niches are the home inside of the environment that define an organism’s role. Different organisms have different niches based upon their diet, adaptations to the environment, and place inside of the food chain. The organisms that reside within the biome are defined as the fauna of the biome.\n\nThe basis of the central principles of evolutionary ecology can be attributed to Charles Darwin (1809-1882), specifically in referencing his theory of natural selection and population dynamics, which discusses how populations of a species change over time. According to Ernst Mayr, professor of Zoology at Harvard University, Darwin’s most distinct contributions to evolutionary biology and ecology are as follows: “The first is the non-constancy of species, or the modern conception of evolution itself. The second is the notion of branching evolution, implying the common descent of all species of living things on earth from a single unique origin.”  Additionally, “Darwin further noted that evolution must be gradual, with no major breaks or discontinuities. Finally, he reasoned that the mechanism of evolution was natural selection.” \n\nGeorge Evelyn Hutchinson’s (1903-1991) contributions to the field of ecology spanned over 60 years, in which he had significant influence in systems ecology, radiation ecology, limnology, and entomology. Described as the “father of modern ecology”  by Stephen Jay Gould, Hutchinson was one of the first scientists to link the subjects of ecology and mathematics. According to Hutchinson, he constructed “mathematical models of populations, the changing proportions of individuals of various ages, birthrate, the ecological niche, and population interaction in this technical introduction to population ecology.”  He also had a vast interest in limnology, due to his belief that lakes could be studied as a microcosmthat provides insight into system behavior.  Hutchinson is also known for his work Circular Casual Systems in Ecology, in which he states that “groups of organisms may be acted upon by their environment, and they may react upon it. If a set of properties in either system changes in such a way that the action of the first system on the second changes, this may cause changes in properties of the second system which alter the mode of action of the second system on the first.” \n\nRobert MacArthur (1930-1972) is best known in the field of Evolutionary Ecology for his work \"The Theory of Island Biogeography\", in which he and his co-author propose “that the number of species on any island reflects a balance between the rate at which new species colonize it and the rate at which populations of established species become extinct.”\n\nAccording to the University of Texas, Eric Pianka’s (1939–present) work in evolutionary ecology includes foraging strategies, reproductive tactics, competition and niche theory, community structure and organization, species diversity, and understanding rarity. Pianka is also known for his interest in lizards to study ecological occurrences, as he claimed they were “often abundant, making them relatively easy to locate, observe, and capture.”\n\nMichael L. Rosenzweig (1941–present) created and popularized Reconciliation ecology, which began with his theory that designated nature preserves would not be enough land to conserve the biodiversity of Earth, as humans have used so much land that they have negatively impacted biogeochemical cycles and had other ecological impacts that have negatively affected species compositions.\n\n\nA large part of Evolutionary ecology is about utilising models and finding empirical data as proof. Examples include the Lack clutch size model devised by David Lack and his study of Darwin's finches on the Galapagos Islands. Lack's study of Darwin's finches was important in analyzing the role of different ecological factors in speciation. Lack suggested that differences in species were adaptive and produced by natural selection, based on the assertion by G.F. Gause that two species cannot occupy the same niche.\n\nRichard Levins introduced his model of the specialization of species in 1968, which investigated how habitat specialization evolved within heterogeneous environments using the fitness sets an organism or species possesses. This model developed the concept of spatial scales in specific environments, defining fine-grained spatial scales and coarse-grained spatial scales. The implications of this model include a rapid increase in environmental ecologists' understanding of how spatial scales impact species diversity in a certain environment.\n\nAnother model is Law & Diekmann's 1996 models on mutualism, which is defined as a relationship between two organisms that benefits both individuals. Law and Diekmann developed a framework called adaptive dynamics, which assumes that changes in plant or animal populations in response to a disturbance or lack thereof occurs at a faster rate than mutations occur. It is aimed to simplify other models addressing the relationships within communities.\n\nThe tangled nature model provides different methods for demonstrating and predicting trends in evolutionary ecology. The model analyzes an individual prone to mutation within a population as well as other factors such as extinction rate. The model was developed by Simon Laird, Daniel Lawson, and Henrik Jeldtoft Jensen of the Imperial College London in 2002. The purpose of the model is to create a simple and logical ecological model based on observation. The model is designed such that ecological effects can be accounted for when determining form, and fitness of a population.\n\nRosenzweig's idea of Reconciliation ecology was developed based on existing research, which was conducted on the principle first suggested by Alexander von Humboldt stating that larger areas of land will have increased species diversity as compared to smaller areas. This research focused on species-area relationships (SPARs) and the different scales on which they exist, ranging from sample-area to interprovincial SPARs. Steady-state dynamics in diversity gave rise to these SPARs, which are now used to measure the reduction of species diversity on Earth. In response to this decline in diversity, Rosenzweig's Reconciliation ecology was born.\n\nEvolutionary ecology has been studied using symbiotic relationships between organisms to determine the evolutionary forces by which such relationships develop. In symbiotic relationships, the symbiont must confer some advantage to its host in order to persist and continue to be evolutionarily viable. Research has been conducted using aphids and the symbiotic bacteria with which they coevolve. These bacteria are most frequently conserved from generation to generation, displaying high levels of vertical transmission. Results have shown that these symbiotic bacteria ultimately confer some resistance to parasites to their host aphids, which both increases the fitness of the aphids and lead to symbiont-mediated coevolution between the species.\n\nThe effects of evolutionary ecology and its consequences can be seen in the case of color variation among African cichlid fish. With over 2,000 species, cichlid fishes are very species-rich and capable of complex social interactions . Polychromatism, the variation of color patterns within a population, occurs within cichlid fishes due to environmental adaptations and to increase chances of sexual reproduction \n\n\n", "id": "1261011", "title": "Evolutionary ecology"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1743980", "text": "Resurrection ecology\n\n\"Resurrection ecology\" is an evolutionary biology technique whereby researchers hatch dormant eggs from lake sediments to study animals as they existed decades ago. It is a new approach that might allow scientists to observe evolution as it occurred, by comparing the animal forms hatched from older eggs with their extant descendants.\n\nOne such researcher in the field is W. Charles Kerfoot of Michigan Technological University whose results were published in the journal \"Limnology and Oceanography\". He reported on success in a search for \"resting eggs\" of zooplankton that are dormant in Portage Lake on Michigan's Upper Peninsula. The lake has undergone a considerable amount of change over the last 100 years including flooding by copper mine debris, dredging, and eutrophication.\n\nAlthough the more esoteric demonstration of natural selection is alone a valuable aspect of the study described, there is a clear ecological implication in the discovery that very old zooplankton eggs have survived in the lake: the potential still exists, if and when this environment is restored to something of a more pristine nature, for at least some of the original (pre-disturbance) inhabitants to re-establish populations once presumed lost. The genes valuable to survival of those species in a restored environment are still \"readily\" available and may be quickly assimilated by the modern populations, perhaps requiring no more than a fortuitous disturbance of the bottom. \n\n\n", "id": "1743980", "title": "Resurrection ecology"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=796412", "text": "Experimental evolution\n\nExperimental evolution is the use of laboratory experiments or controlled field manipulations to explore evolutionary dynamics. Evolution may be observed in the laboratory as individuals/populations adapt to new environmental conditions by natural selection. There are two different ways in which adaptation can arise in experimental evolution. One is via an individual organism gaining a novel beneficial mutation. The other is from allele frequency change in standing genetic variation already present in a population of organisms. Other evolutionary forces outside of mutation and natural selection can also play a role or be incorporated into experimental evolution studies, such as genetic drift and gene flow. The organism used is decided by the experimenter, based off whether the hypothesis to be tested involves adaptation through mutation or allele frequency change. A large number of generations are required for adaptive mutation to occur, and experimental evolution via mutation is carried out in viruses or unicellular organisms with rapid generation times, such as bacteria and asexual clonal yeast. Polymorphic populations of asexual or sexual yeast, and multicellular eukaryotes like Drosophila, can adapt to new environments through allele frequency change in standing genetic variation. Organisms with longer generations times, although costly, can be used in experimental evolution. Laboratory studies with foxes and with rodents (see below) have shown that notable adaptations can occur within as few as 10–20 generations and experiments with wild guppies have observed adaptations within comparable numbers of generations. More recently, experimentally evolved individuals or populations are often analyzed using whole genome sequencing, an approach known as Evolve and Resequence (E&R). E&R can identify mutations that lead to adaptation in clonal individuals or identify alleles that changed in frequency in polymorphic populations, by comparing the sequences of individuals/populations before and after adaptation. The sequence data makes it possible to pinpoint the site in a DNA sequence that a mutation/allele frequency change occurred to bring about adaptation. The nature of the adaptation and functional follow up studies can shed insight into what effect the mutation/allele has on phenotype.\n\nUnwittingly, humans have carried out evolution experiments for as long as they have been domesticating plants and animals. Selective breeding of plants and animals has led to varieties that differ dramatically from their original wild-type ancestors. Examples are the cabbage varieties, maize, or the large number of different dog breeds. The power of human breeding to create varieties with extreme differences from a single species was already recognized by Charles Darwin. In fact, he started out his book \"The Origin of Species\" with a chapter on variation in domestic animals. In this chapter, Darwin discussed in particular the pigeon.\n\nOne of the first to carry out a controlled evolution experiment was William Dallinger. In the late 19th century, he cultivated small unicellular organisms in a custom-built incubator over a time period of seven years (1880–1886). Dallinger slowly increased the temperature of the incubator from an initial 60 °F up to 158 °F. The early cultures had shown clear signs of distress at a temperature of 73 °F, and were certainly not capable of surviving at 158 °F. The organisms Dallinger had in his incubator at the end of the experiment, on the other hand, were perfectly fine at 158 °F. However, these organisms would no longer grow at the initial 60 °F. Dallinger concluded that he had found evidence for Darwinian adaptation in his incubator, and that the organisms had adapted to live in a high-temperature environment. Dallinger's incubator was accidentally destroyed in 1886, and Dallinger could not continue this line of research.\n\nFrom the 1880s to 1980, experimental evolution was intermittently practiced by a variety of evolutionary biologists, including the highly influential Theodosius Dobzhansky. Like other experimental research in evolutionary biology during this period, much of this work lacked extensive replication and was carried out only for relatively short periods of evolutionary time.\n\nExperimental evolution has been used in various formats to understand underlying evolutionary processes in a controlled system. Experimental evolution has been performed on multicellular and unicellular eukaryotes, prokaryotes, and viruses. Similar works have also been performed by directed evolution of individual enzyme, ribozyme and replicator genes.\n\nIn the 1950s, the Soviet biologist Georgy Shaposhnikov conducted on aphids of the genus. By transferring them to plants normally nearly or completely unsuitable for them, he had forced populations of parthenogenetic descendants to adapt to the new food source to the point of reproductive isolation from the regular populations of the same species.\n\nOne of the first of a new wave of experiments using this strategy was the laboratory \"evolutionary radiation\" of \"Drosophila melanogaster\" populations that Michael R. Rose started in February, 1980. This system started with ten populations, five cultured at later ages, and five cultured at early ages. Since then more than 200 different populations have been created in this laboratory radiation, with selection targeting multiple characters. Some of these highly differentiated populations have also been selected \"backward\" or \"in reverse,\" by returning experimental populations to their ancestral culture regime. Hundreds of people have worked with these populations over the better part of three decades. Much of this work is summarized in the papers collected in the book \"Methuselah Flies\".\n\nThe early experiments in flies were limited to studying phenotypes but the molecular mechanisms, i.e., changes in DNA that facilitated such changes, could not be identified. This changed with genomics technology. Subsequently, Thomas Turner coined the term Evolve and Resequence (E&R) and several studies used E&R approach with mixed success One of the more interesting experimental evolution studies was conducted by Gabriel Haddad's group at UC San Diego, where Haddad and colleagues evolved flies to adapt to low oxygen environments, also known as hypoxia. After 200 generations, they used E&R approach to identify genomic regions that were selected by natural selection in the hypoxia adapted flies. More recent experiments are following up E&R predictions with RNAseq and genetic crosses. Such efforts in combining E&R with experimental validations should be powerful in identifying genes that regulate adaptation in flies.\n\nBacteria have short generation times, easily sequenced genomes, and well-understood biology. They are therefore commonly used for experimental evolution studies.\n\nOne of the most widely known examples of laboratory bacterial evolution is the long-term \"E.coli\" experiment of Richard Lenski. On February 24, 1988, Lenski started growing twelve lineages of \"E. coli\" under identical growth conditions. When one of the populations evolved the ability to aerobically metabolize citrate from the growth medium and showed greatly increased growth, this provided a dramatic observation of evolution in action. The experiment continues to this day, and is now the longest-running (in terms of generations) controlled evolution experiment ever undertaken. Since the inception of the experiment, the bacteria have grown for more than 60,000 generations. Lenski and colleagues regularly publish updates on the status of the experiments.\n\nIn 1998, Theodore Garland, Jr. and colleagues started a long-term experiment that involves selective breeding of mice for high voluntary activity levels on running wheels. This experiment also continues to this day (> 65 generations). Mice from the four replicate \"High Runner\" lines evolved to run almost three times as many running-wheel revolutions per day compared with the four unselected control lines of mice, mainly by running faster than the control mice rather than running for more minutes/day.\n\nThe HR mice exhibit an elevated maximal aerobic capacity when tested on a motorized treadmill. They also exhibit alterations in motivation and the reward system of the brain. Pharmacological studies point to alterations in dopamine function and the endocannabinoid system. The High Runner lines have been proposed as a model to study human attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and administration of Ritalin reduces their wheel running approximately to the levels of control mice. Click here for a mouse wheel running video.\n\nStickleback fish have both marine and freshwater species, the freshwater species evolving since the last ice age. Freshwater species can survive colder temperatures. Scientists tested to see if they could reproduce this evolution of cold-tolerance by keeping marine sticklebacks in cold freshwater. It took the marine sticklebacks only three generations to evolve to match the 2.5 degree Celsius improvement in cold-tolerance found in wild freshwater sticklebacks. Microbial cells and recently mammalian cells are evolved under nutrient limiting conditions to study their metabolic response and engineer cells for better characteristics.\n\nBecause of their rapid generation times microbes offer an opportunity to study microevolution in the classroom. A number of exercises involving bacteria and yeast teach concepts ranging from the evolution of resistance to the evolution of multicellularity. With the advent of next-generation sequencing technology it has become possible for students to conduct an evolutionary experiment, sequence the evolved genomes, and to analyze and interpret the results.\n\n\n\n", "id": "796412", "title": "Experimental evolution"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1653221", "text": "Parasite load\n\nParasite load is a measure of the number and virulence of the parasites that a host organism harbours. Quantitative parasitology deals with measures to quantify parasite loads in samples of hosts and to make statistical comparisons of parasitism across host samples. \nIn evolutionary biology, parasite load has important implications for sexual selection and the evolution of sex, as well as openness to experience.\n\nA single parasite species usually has an aggregated distribution across host individuals, which means that most hosts harbor few parasites, while a few hosts carry the vast majority of parasite individuals. This poses considerable problems for students of parasite ecology: use of parametric statistics should be avoided. Log-transformation of data before the application of parametric test, or the use of non-parametric statistics is often recommended. However, this can give rise to further problems. Therefore, modern day quantitative parasitology is based on more advanced biostatistical methods.\n\nIn vertebrates, males frequently carry higher parasite loads than females. Differences in movement patterns, habitat choice, diet, body size, and ornamentation are all thought to contribute to this sex bias observed in parasite loads. Often males have larger habitat ranges and thus are likely to encounter more parasite-dense areas than female conspecifics. Whenever sexual dimorphism is exhibited in species, the larger sex is thought to tolerate higher parasite loads.\n\nIn insects, susceptibility to parasite load has been linked to genetic variation in the insect colony. In colonies of Hymenoptera (ants, bees and wasps), colonies with high genetic variation that were exposed to parasites experienced lesser parasite loads than colonies that are more genetically similar.\n\nDepending on the parasitic species in question, various methods of quantification allow scientists to measure the numbers of parasites present and determine the parasite load of an organism. Quantifying the parasite depends on what type of parasite is in question as well as where it resides in the host body. For example, intracellular parasites such as the protozoan genus \"Plasmodium\" which causes Malaria in humans, are quantified through performing a blood smear and counting the number of white blood cells infected by viewing the smear through a microscope. Other parasites residing in the blood of a host could be similarly counted on a blood smear using specific staining methods to better visualize the cells. As technology advances, more modernized methods of parasite quantification are emerging such as hand held automated cell counters, in order to efficiently count parasites such as \"Plasmodium\" in blood smears.\n\nQuantifying intestinal parasites, such as nematodes present in an individual, often it requires dissection of the animal, extraction and counting of the parasites. Other techniques to determine intestinal parasites exist which do not require dissection; such as detection of parasitic infections by fecal examination. This is a common practice in veterinary medicine and is used to calculate parasite load in domestic animals, such as cats and dogs. Methods of fecal examination include fecal smears and flotation methods. Fecal floats can detect reproductive means of endoparasitic (see endoparasite) organisms (eggs, larvae, oocysts, and cysts) that are passed through the digestive system and are therefore present in the feces.\n\nFor analytical statistical methods used to study the extent and intensity of parasitic infection see Quantitative parasitology.\n\nParasite load has been known to effect sexual selection in various species. Hamilton and Zuk (1982) suggested that females of species could base their choice of mates on heritable resistance to parasites. This hypothesis proposes that the expression of secondary sex characteristics depends on the hosts overall health. Hosts coevolve with parasites and thus generate heritable resistance to parasites, which have a net negative effect on host viability. Therefore, females will select males with few or no parasites by basing their choice on whether or not the male has fully expressed secondary sexual, otherwise known as 'healthy' characteristics.\n\nOne study found that parasite load predicts mate choice in guppies. When controlling for other variables, females were shown to prefer males with relatively few parasites with this preference being associated with higher display rates that occur in less parasitized males. This phenomenon has also been observed in other species.\n\nParasite load has also been shown to affect the behavior of the infected individual. Numerous studies have been done looking at the effects of number of parasites present in a host and how this correlates with behaviors such as foraging, migration, and competitive behavior. In a study performed at the University of Georgia, it was found that beetles with higher parasite loads won more fights than those with lower parasitic loads. When put up against beetles with no parasites present, the parasite-laden beetles lost the fights.\n\nBird species have also exhibited behavioural effects in relation to parasite load. In passerine songbirds, high parasite load results in reduced song outputs, affecting the output of secondary sexual characteristics that influence mate selection. Similar effects have been observed in other bird species.\n\nParasite load has been shown to affect the spread of infectious diseases. For example, parasitologists at the Universidade de São Paulo researched the effect of Chaga's disease on the immune system. They found that individuals who survived the acute phase of infection develop parasite-specific immune response that reduces parasite levels in tissues and blood. This research aims to discover if the parasite load during the acute stage of infection effects if the host will eventually have a positive immune response. The research was conducted on mice, with the intension of eventually using the information gleaned from the experiments to assist humans who have contracted Chaga's disease. Marinho \"et al.\" found that parasite loads in the acute phase of infection correlates at the late chronic stage of the disease, with the intensity of the activation and response of the immune system of the host. This research could lead to new discoveries in parasitology. This could potentially prevent the spread of parasites and therefore diseases linked to parasite infection within a given population.\n\nHost stress causes conditions within the host to be less than ideal for parasites, leading to and causing parasite load. Malnutrition has been shown to suppress the immune system, leading to higher parasite loads within a population and increased transmission rates throughout the population. It has been shown that malnutrition, and putrefaction can lead to illness within a population and therefore increase the amount of parasites within a population. Those individuals that are malnourished and stressed exhibit the highest numbers of parasite load. This implies that these individuals have a higher likelihood of dying due to the environmental factors, as well as parasite infection, likely killing the population of parasites within that specific host. This would then limit the propagation of the parasites within the population.\n\nIn the experiment conducted by Pulkkinen \"et al.\" it was found that when food was limited in a population of crabs infected with daphnia, there were mortalities among the infected population of crabs. This was due to stress within environment, as well as stress within the host (crab body) from parasite infection. Pulkkinen \"et al.\" also found that after a period of time there was a corresponding reduction in average size of crabs, and therefore the mortality rate due to malnutrition and environmental stress was reduced. This increased the parasite load within the population. Parasite load is a complex ecological phenomenon, often exhibiting a negative feedback loop, as it is within the interest of the parasite population for the host to survive infection.\n\n", "id": "1653221", "title": "Parasite load"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1628043", "text": "Adaptationism\n\nAdaptationism is the Darwinian view that many physical and psychological traits of organisms are evolved adaptations. Pan-adaptationism is the strong form of this, deriving from the early 20th century modern synthesis, that all traits are adaptations, a view now shared by few biologists. Adaptationists perform research to try to distinguish adaptations (e.g., the umbilical cord) from byproducts (e.g., the belly button) or random variation (e.g., convex or concave shape of the belly button). George Williams' \"Adaptation and Natural Selection\" (1966) was highly influential in its development, defining some of the heuristics used to identify adaptations.\n\nAdaptationism is an approach to studying the evolution of form and function. It attempts to frame the existence and persistence of traits, assuming that each of them arose independently and improved the reproductive success of the organism's ancestors. \nA trait is an adaptation if it fulfils the following criteria:\n\n\nGenetic reality provides constraints on the power of random mutation followed by natural selection.\n\nWith pleiotropy, some genes control multiple traits, so that adaptation of one trait is impeded by effects on other traits that are not necessarily adaptive. Selection that influences epistasis is a case where the regulation or expression of one gene, depends on one or several others. This is true for a good number of genes though to differing extents. The reason why this leads to muddied responses is that selection for a trait that is epistatically based can mean that an allele for a gene that is epistatic when selected would happen to affect others. This leads to the coregulation of others for a reason other than there is an adaptive quality to each of those traits. Like with pleiotropy, traits could reach fixation in a population as a by-product of selection for another.\n\nIn the context of development the difference between pleiotropy and epistasis is not so clear but at the genetic level the distinction is more clear. With these traits as being by-products of others it can ultimately be said that these traits evolved but not that they necessarily represent adaptations.\n\nPolygenic traits are controlled by a number of separate genes. Many traits are polygenic, for example human height. To drastically change a polygenic trait is likely to require multiple changes.\n\nAnatomical constraints are features of organism's anatomy that are prevented from change by being constrained in some way. When organisms diverge from a common ancestor and inherit certain characteristics which become modified by natural selection of mutant phenotypes, it is as if some are traits are locked in place and are unable to change in certain ways. Some textbook anatomical constraints often include examples of structures that connect parts of the body together though a physical link.\n\nThese links are hard if not impossible to break because evolution usually requires that anatomy be formed by small consecutive modifications in populations through generations. In his book, \"Why We Get Sick\", Randolph Nesse uses the \"blind spot\" in the vertebrate eye (caused by the nerve fibers running through the retina) as an example of this. He argues that natural selection has come up with an elaborate work-around of the eyes wobbling back-and-forth to correct for this, but vertebrates have not found the solution embodied in cephalopod eyes, where the optic nerve does not interrupt the view. See also: Evolution of the eye.\n\nAnother example is the cranial nerves in tetrapods. In early vertebrate evolution, sharks, skates, and rays (collectively Chondrichthyes), the cranial nerves run from the part of the brain that interprets sensory information, and radiate out towards the organs that produce those sensations. In tetrapods, however, and mammals in particular, the nerves take an elaborate winding path through the cranium around structures that evolved after the common ancestor with sharks.\n\nAdaptationism is sometimes characterized by critics as an unsubstantiated assumption that all or most traits are optimal adaptations. Structuralist critics (most notably Richard Lewontin and Stephen Jay Gould in their spandrel paper) contend that the adaptationists have over-emphasized the power of natural selection to shape individual traits to an evolutionary optimum. Adaptationists are sometimes accused by their critics of using \"ad hoc\" \"just-so stories\". The critics, in turn, have been accused of misrepresentation (Straw man argumentation), rather than attacking the actual statements of supposed adaptationists.\n\nAdaptationist researchers respond by asserting that they, too, follow George Williams' depiction of adaptation as an \"onerous concept\" that should only be applied in light of strong evidence. This evidence can be generally characterized as the successful prediction of novel phenomena based on the hypothesis that design details of adaptations should fit a complex evolved design to respond to a specific set of selection pressures. In evolutionary psychology, researchers such as Leda Cosmides, John Tooby, and David Buss contend that the bulk of research findings that were uniquely predicted through adaptationist hypothesizing comprise evidence of the methods' validity.\n\nThere are philosophical issues with the way biologists speak of function, effectively invoking teleology, the purpose of an adaptation.\n\nTo say something has a function is to say something about what it does for the organism. It also says something about its history: how it has come about. A heart pumps blood: that is its function. It also emits sound, which is considered to be an ancillary side-effect, not its function. The heart has a history (which may be well or poorly understood), and that history is about how natural selection formed and maintained the heart as a pump. Every aspect of an organism that has a function has a history. Now, an adaptation must have a functional history: therefore we expect it must have undergone selection caused by relative survival in its habitat. It would be quite wrong to use the word adaptation about a trait which arose as a by-product.\n\nIt is widely regarded as unprofessional for a biologist to say something like \"A wing is for flying,\" although that is their normal function. A biologist would be conscious that sometime in the remote past feathers on a small dinosaur had the function of retaining heat, and that later many wings were not used for flying (e.g. penguins, ostriches). So, the biologist would rather say that the wings on a bird or an insect usually had the function of aiding flight. That would carry the connotation of being an adaptation with a history of evolution by natural selection.\n\nTeleology was introduced into biology by Aristotle to describe the adaptedness of organisms. Biologists have found the implications of purposefulness awkward as they suggest supernatural intention, an aspect of Plato's thinking which Aristotle rejected. A similar term, teleonomy, was suggested by Colin Pittendrigh in 1958; it grew out of cybernetics and self-organising systems. Biologists of the 1960s such as Ernst Mayr, George C. Williams and Jacques Monod used it as a less loaded alternative. However, the discomfort remains. On the one hand, adaptation is obviously purposeful: natural selection chooses what works and eliminates what does not. On the other hand, biologists want to deny conscious purpose in evolution. The dilemma gave rise to a famous joke by the evolutionary biologist Haldane: \"Teleology is like a mistress to a biologist: he cannot live without her but he's unwilling to be seen with her in public.'\" David Hull commented that Haldane's mistress \"has become a lawfully wedded wife. Biologists no longer feel obligated to apologize for their use of teleological language; they flaunt it. The only concession which they make to its disreputable past is to rename it 'teleonomy'.\"\n\n\n\n", "id": "1628043", "title": "Adaptationism"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1653186", "text": "Evolutionary arms race\n\nIn evolutionary biology, an evolutionary arms race is a struggle between competing sets of co-evolving genes, traits, or species, that develop adaptations and counter-adaptations against each other, resembling an arms race. These are often described as examples of positive feedback. The co-evolving gene sets may be in different species, as in an evolutionary arms race between a predator species and its prey (Vermeij, 1987), or a parasite and its host. Alternatively, the arms race may be between members of the same species, as in the manipulation/sales resistance model of communication (Dawkins & Krebs, 1979) or as in runaway evolution or Red Queen effects. One example of an evolutionary arms race is in sexual conflict between the sexes, often described with the term Fisherian runaway. Thierry Lodé emphasized the role of such antagonistic interactions in evolution leading to character displacements and antagonist coevolution. The escalation hypothesis put forward by Geerat Vermeij speaks of more general conflicts and was originally based on his work with marine gastropod fossils.\n\nCo-evolution itself is not necessarily an arms race. For example, mutualism may drive co-operative adaptations in a pair of species. This is the case with certain flowers' ultra-violet color patterns, whose function is to guide bees to the center of the flower and promote pollination. Co-evolution is also interspecific by definition; it excludes intraspecific arms races such as sexual conflict.\n\nEvolutionary arms races can even be displayed between humans and micro-organisms, where medical researchers make antibiotics, and micro-organisms evolve into new strains that are more resistant.\n\nEvolutionary arms races often evolve when a trait is only beneficial compared to the population. For instance, if a tree has a mutation making it taller, it will have an advantage due to more sunlight. But as soon as other trees reach the same height, it loses that advantage. As soon as a taller tree appears, it has the advantage. In this example, the nearest peak of the evolutionary landscape moves as the population approaches it. Another example of runaway evolution in sexual selection is an elk's antlers. Having big antlers makes a male elk more likely to win a mate. In fact, having big antlers is a requirement to mate. As a result, elk evolve antlers that are incredibly costly to build, maintain, and fight with. By the end of the mating season, the average male loses 25% of his body weight due to fighting, which he has to make up before winter starts.\n\nArms races may be classified as either symmetrical or asymmetrical. In a symmetrical arms race, selection pressure acts on participants in the same direction. An example of this is trees growing taller as a result of competition for light, where the selective advantage for either species is increased height. An asymmetrical arms race involves contrasting selection pressures, such as the case of cheetahs and gazelles, where cheetahs evolve to be better at hunting and killing while gazelles evolve not to hunt and kill, but rather to evade capture.\n\nSelective pressure between two species can include host-parasite coevolution. This antagonistic relationship leads to the necessity for the pathogen to have the best virulent alleles to infect the organism and for the host to have the best resistant alleles to survive parasitism. As a consequence, allele frequencies vary through time depending on the size of virulent and resistant populations (fluctuation of genetic selection pressure) and generation time (mutation rate) where some genotypes are preferentially selected thanks to the individual fitness gain. Genetic change accumulation in both population explains a constant adaptation to have lower fitness costs and avoid extinction in accordance with the Red Queen's hypothesis suggested by Leigh Van Valen in 1973.\n\nThe Bintje Potato is derived from a cross between \"Munstersen\" and \"Fransen\" potato varieties. It was created in the Netherlands and now is mainly cultivated in the North of France and Belgium. The oomycete \"Phytophthora infestans\" is responsible for the potato blight, in particular during the European famine in 1840. Zoospores (mobile spores, characteristics of oomycetes) are liberated by zoosporangia provided from a mycelium and brought by rain or wind before infecting tubers and leaves. Black colours appear on the plant because of the infection of its cellular system necessary for the multiplication of the oomycete infectious population. The parasite contains virulent-avirulent allelic combinations in several microsatellite loci, likewise the host contains several multiloci resistance genes (or R gene). That interaction is called gene-for-gene relationship and is, in general, widespread in plant diseases. Expression of genetic patterns in the two species is a combination of resistance and virulence characteristics in order to have the best survival rate.\n\nBats have evolved to use echolocation to detect and catch their prey. Moths have in turn evolved to detect the echolocation calls of hunting bats, and evoke evasive flight maneuvers, or reply with their own ultrasonic clicks to confuse the bat's echolocation. The Arctiidae subfamily of Noctuid moths uniquely respond to bat echolocation in three prevailing hypotheses: startle, sonar jamming, and acoustic aposematic defense. All these differences depend on specific environmental settings and the type of echolocation call; however, these hypotheses are not mutually exclusive and can be used by the same moth for defense. The different defense mechanisms have been shown to be directly responsive to bat echolocation through sympatry studies. In places with spatial or temporal isolation between bats and their prey, the moth species hearing mechanism tends to regress. Fullard et al. (2004) compared adventive and endemic Noctiid moth species in a bat-free habitat to ultrasound and found that all of the adventive species reacted to the ultrasound by slowing their flight times, while only one of the endemic species reacted to the ultrasound signal, indicating a loss of hearing over time in the endemic population. However, the degree of loss or regression depends on the amount of evolutionary time and whether or not the moth species has developed secondary uses for hearing. Some bats are known to use clicks at frequencies above or below moths' hearing ranges. This is known as the allotonic frequency hypothesis. It argues that the auditory systems in moths have driven their bat predators to use higher or lower frequency echolocation to circumvent the moth hearing.Barbastelle bats have evolved to use a quieter mode of echolocation, calling at a reduced volume and further reducing the volume of their clicks as they close in on prey moths. The lower volume of clicks reduces the effective successful hunting range, but results in a significantly higher number of moths caught than other, louder bat species. \n\nMoths have further evolved the ability to discriminate between high and low echolocation click rates, which indicates whether the bat has just detected their presence or is actively pursuing them. This allows them to decide whether or not defensive ultrasonic clicks are worth the time and energy expenditure.\n\nMany of the rough-skinned newt produces tetrodotoxin (TTX) from skin glands as a defence against predation. This toxin binds reversibly to sodium channels in nerve cells and interferes with the normal flow of sodium ions in and out of the cell. This has the effect of inducing paralysis and death. Throughout much of the newt’s range, the common garter snake has been observed to exhibit resistance to the tetrodotoxin produced in its skin. While in principle the toxin binds to a tube shaped protein that acts as a sodium channel in the snake's nerve cells, researchers have identified a genetic disposition in several snake populations where the protein is configured in such a way as to hamper or prevent binding of the toxin. In each of these populations, the snakes exhibit resistance to the toxin and successfully prey upon the newts. The mutations in the snake’s genes that conferred resistance to the toxin have resulted in a selective pressure that favors newts that produce more potent levels of toxin. Increases in newt toxicity then apply a selective pressure favoring snakes with mutations conferring even greater resistance. This evolutionary arms race has resulted in the newts producing levels of toxin far in excess of what is needed to kill any other conceivable predator. Toxin resistant garter snakes are the only known animals today that can eat a rough-skinned newt and survive. The interactions between garter snakes and newts have been studied to understand the coevolution between the two species. In populations where the two live together, higher levels of TTX and resistance to TTX are observed in newts and garter snakes respectively. In populations where the species are separated, the TTX levels and resistance are lower when compared to the sympatric populations. While isolated garter snakes have lower resistance, they still demonstrate an ability to resist some levels of TTX exposure. This fact suggests that garter snakes are predisposed to the development of TTX resistance and that it may be an ancestral trait. The resistance of garter snakes is measured by observing a snake’s crawling speed after it has ingested TTX. The most resistant snakes continue to crawl at normal speeds even after high levels of TTX have been ingested. The snakes on the lower end of the spectrum show decreased movement and signs of paralysis when exposed to TTX. The lower levels of resistance observed in separated populations of newts and garter snakes suggest that there is a fitness cost associated with TTX resistance. The snakes with high levels of TTX resistance have slower average crawl speeds when compared to isolated populations of snakes. Slower crawl speeds make the snakes more susceptible to predators. This illustrates that while it is advantageous to be resistant to TTX when newts are present, it becomes more costly in the absence of selective pressures from the newt. The same pattern is seen in isolated populations of newts. In these populations, where garter snakes are absent, newts produce lower levels of TTX in their skin. The choice to not produce TTX demonstrates that there is some cost to the newt when they produce the toxin. This relationship creates a geographic pattern of resistance in populations. There are areas known as hotspots in which levels of TTX and resistance are extremely high. This alludes to a close interaction between newts and snakes. There are also areas of coldspots where newts and snakes have minimal interaction leading to lower levels of TTX production and resistance.\n\nThe whelk predators used their own shell to open the shell of their prey, oftentimes breaking both shells of the predator and prey in the process. This led to the fitness of larger-shelled prey to be higher and then more selected for through generations, however, the predator’s population selected for those who were more efficient at opening the larger-shelled prey. This example is an excellent example of asymmetrical arms race because while the prey is evolving a physical trait, the predators are adapting in a much different way.\n\nPhillips and Shine did a study with the chemical defenses of toxic frogs in response to a snake predator, the floodplain death adders. These snakes eat three types of frogs, one nontoxic, one producing mucus when taken by the predator, and the highly toxic frogs, however, the snakes have also found if they wait to consume their toxic prey the potency decreases. In this specific case, the asymmetry enabled the snakes to overcome the chemical defenses of the toxic frogs after their death. The results of the study showed that the snake became accustomed to the differences in the frogs by their hold and release timing, always holding the nontoxic, while always releasing the highly toxic frogs, with the frogs that discharge mucus somewhere in between. The snakes would also spend generously more time gaped between the release of the highly toxic frogs than the short gaped time between the release of the frogs that discharge mucus. Therefore, the snakes have a much higher advantage of being able to cope with the different frogs defensive mechanisms, while the frogs could eventually increase the potency of their toxic knowing the snakes would adapt to that change as well, such as the snakes having venom themselves for the initial attack. This study showed that even with the dangerous prey, the coevolution is still highly asymmetrical because of the incredible advantage the predators have compared to the prey.\n\nWhen a species has not been subject to an arms race previously, it may be at a severe disadvantage and face extinction well before it could ever hope to adapt to a new predator, competitor, etc. This should not seem surprising, as one species may have been in evolutionary struggles for millions of years while the other might never have faced such pressures. This is a common problem in isolated ecosystems such as Australia or the Hawaiian Islands. In Australia, many invasive species, such as cane toads and rabbits, have spread rapidly due to a lack of competition and a lack of adaptations to cane toad bufotenine on the part of potential predators. Introduced species are a major reason why some indigenous species become endangered or even extinct, as was the case with the dodo.\n\n\nGeneral\n\n", "id": "1653186", "title": "Evolutionary arms race"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1830477", "text": "Pseudoextinction\n\nPseudoextinction (or phyletic extinction) of a species occurs when all members of the species are extinct, but members of a daughter species remain alive. The term pseudoextinction refers to the evolution of a species into a new form, with the resultant disappearance of the ancestral form. Pseudoextinction results in the relationship between ancestor and descendant still existing even though the ancestor species no longer exists. The classic example is that of the dinosaurs. While the dinosaurs of the Mesozoic died out, their distant children, birds, live on today. As of now it is accepted that modern birds evolved from Archaeopteryx, a small dinosaur with flight feathers from the Mesozoic period. Many other families of bird-like dinosaurs also died out as the heirs of the dinosaurs continued to evolve, but because their birds continue to thrive in the world today these species are only pseudoextinct.\n\nFrom a taxonomic perspective, pseudoextinction is \"within an evolutionary lineage, the disappearance of one taxon caused by the appearance of the next.\" The pseudoextinction of a species can be arbitrary, simply resulting from a change in the naming of a species as it evolves from its ancestral form to its descendant form. Taxonomic pseudoextinction has to do with the disappearance of taxa that are categorized together by taxonomists. As they are just grouped together, their extinction is not reflected through lineage; therefore, unlike evolutionary pseudoextinction, taxonomic pseudoextinction does not alter the evolution of daughter species. From an evolutionary perspective, pseudoextinction entails the loss of a species as a result of the creation of a new one. As the primordial species evolves into its daughter species, either by anagenesis or cladogenesis, the ancestral species can be subject to extinction. Throughout the process of evolution, a taxon can disappear; in this case, pseudoextinction is considered an evolutionary event.\n\nFrom a genetic perspective, pseudoextinction is the \"disappearance of a taxon by virtue of its being evolved by anagenesis into another taxon.\" As all species must have an ancestor of a previous species, much of evolution is believed to occur through pseudoextinction. However, it is difficult to prove that any particular fossil species is pseudoextinct unless genetic information has been preserved. For example, it is sometimes claimed that the extinct \"Hyracotherium\" (an ancient horse-like animal commonly known as an eohippus) is pseudoextinct, rather than extinct, because several species of horse, including the zebra and the donkey, are extant today. However, it is not known, and probably cannot be known, whether modern horses actually descend from members of the genus \"Hyracotherium\", or whether they simply share a common ancestor.\n\nOne proposed mechanism of pseudoextinction is endocrine disruption (changing hormone levels). Additionally, when the primary sex-ratio (male to female ratio of a population) is male-biased, predicted levels of pseudoextinction increase. Because the variance of the population size increases with time, the probability of pseudoextinction increases with the length of the time horizon used.\n\nMammal systematist and paleobiologist David Archibald has estimated that as many as 25% of the extinctions recorded in three different early Puercan mammal lineages are pseudoextinctions.\nPseudotermination is an extreme form of pseudoextinction, when a lineage continues as a new species; phylogeny is often difficult to determine in such cases.\n\nExtirpation or regional disappearance can be a stage in pseudoextinction when progressive diachronous range contraction leads to final extinction by the elimination of the last refuge or population growth from this temporal bottleneck.\n\nThe notion of pseudoextinction is sometimes applied to wider taxa than species. For instance, the entire superorder Dinosauria, as traditionally conceived, would have to be considered as pseudoextinct, because feathered dinosaurs are considered by the majority of modern palaeontologists as the ancestors of modern-day birds. Pseudoextinction for such higher taxa appears to be easier to prove. However, pseudoextinct higher taxa are paraphyletic groups, which are rejected as formal taxa in phylogenetic nomenclature; either all dinosaurs are stem-group birds, or birds are derived dinosaurs, but there is no taxon Dinosauria, acceptable in cladistic taxonomy, that excludes the taxon Aves. Pseudoextinction cannot be applied to the genus or family levels as, “when a species evolves to a new form, causing the pseudoextinction of the ancestral form, the new species is normally assigned the same higher taxa as the ancestor.” When a family or genus goes extinct it must be true extinction, because pseudoextinction would mean that at least one member of the family or genus is still extant.\n\nPseudoextinction is an event that occurs much more frequently under the assumption of a Phyletic gradualism model of evolution, under which speciation is slow, uniform and gradual. The majority of speciation would occur through anagenesis under this model, resulting in a majority of species undergoing Pseudoextinction. However, the model of punctuated equilibrium is more widely accepted, with the proposal that most species remain in stasis, a state of very little evolutionary change, for a large proportion of the species' lifespan. This would result in increased cases of speciation through cladogenesis and true extinction, with fewer cases of Pseudoextinction. Nearly all species undergo true extinction under the model of punctuated equilibrium. Charles Darwin proposed the idea of stasis in his book, \"On the Origin of Species\". He suggested that species spend the majority of their evolutionary lifespan in the same form, having undergone very little morphological or genetic change.\n\nAnother concept of species on the tree of life is the composite species concept. It sees one species as occupying all internodes of the tree that have the same combination of (morphological, ecological, etc.) characters. Here, a species starts with the acquisition of a character and ends when another change is fixed in its lineage. This process - of one lineage turning into what is afterwards seen as another species because of the fixation of a novel character - is often called anagenesis. But we have a similar situation here where a species is considered to end by definition but is not really extinct (it survived, after all, in the form of one descendent species with a different character combination), and so we could also consider it to be pseudoextinction. On the other hand, under the composite species concept a species continues through a lineage split if only one of the two resulting lineages acquires a new character, an event that is sometimes called speciation through \"budding\". The one that has a new character is now a new species but the other lineage, the one that looks identical to the common ancestor, is considered to be the common ancestor. An example would be a widespread breeding group remaining unchanged while \"budding off\" a small isolated population that accumulates changes until it cannot interbreed with the others any more.\n\n\n", "id": "1830477", "title": "Pseudoextinction"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1022185", "text": "Baldwin effect\n\nIn evolutionary biology, the Baldwin effect describes the effect of learned behavior on evolution. In brief, James Mark Baldwin and others suggested during the eclipse of Darwinism in the late 19th century that an organism's \"ability to learn\" new behaviors (e.g. to acclimatise to a new stressor) will affect its reproductive success and will therefore have an effect on the genetic makeup of its species through natural selection. Though this process appears similar to Lamarckian evolution, Lamarck proposed that living things \"inherited\" their parents' acquired characteristics. The Baldwin effect has been independently proposed several times, and today it is generally recognized as part of the modern synthesis.\n\nThe effect, then unnamed, was put forward in 1896 in a paper \"A New Factor in Evolution\" by American psychologist James Mark Baldwin. The paper proposed a mechanism for specific selection for general learning ability. As Robert Richards explains:\nIf animals entered a new environment—or their old environment rapidly changed—those\nthat could flexibly respond by learning new behaviors or by ontogenetically adapting would\nbe naturally preserved. This saved remnant would, over several generations, have the\nopportunity to exhibit spontaneously congenital variations similar to their acquired traits and\nhave these variations naturally selected. It would look as though the acquired traits had sunk\ninto the hereditary substance in a Lamarckian fashion, but the process would really be neo-Darwinian.\nSelected offspring would tend to have an increased capacity for learning new skills rather than being confined to genetically coded, relatively fixed abilities. In effect, it places emphasis on the fact that the sustained behavior of a species or group can shape the evolution of that species. The \"Baldwin effect\" is better understood in evolutionary developmental biology literature as a scenario in which a character or trait change occurring in an organism as a result of its interaction with its environment becomes gradually assimilated into its developmental genetic or epigenetic repertoire (Simpson, 1953; Newman, 2002). In the words of Daniel Dennett,\nThanks to the Baldwin effect, species can be said to pretest the efficacy of particular different designs by phenotypic (individual) exploration of the space of nearby possibilities. If a particularly winning setting is thereby discovered, this discovery will \"create\" a new selection pressure: organisms that are closer in the adaptive landscape to that discovery will have a clear advantage over those more distant.\nAn update to the Baldwin Effect was developed by Jean Piaget, Paul Weiss, and Conrad Waddington in the 1960s–1970s. This new version included an explicit role for the social in shaping subsequent natural change in humans (both evolutionary and developmental), with reference to alterations of selection pressures.\n\nAs is to be expected from Stigler's law, subsequent research shows that Baldwin was not the first to identify the process; Douglas Spalding mentioned it in 1873.\n\nSuppose a species is threatened by a new predator and there is a behavior that makes it more difficult for the predator to kill individuals of the species. Individuals who learn the behavior more quickly will obviously be at an advantage. As time goes on, the ability to learn the behavior will improve (by genetic selection), and at some point it will seem to be an instinct.\n\nBaldwin gives the following case involving cooperation: \"Animals may be kept alive let us say in a given environment by social cooperation only; these transmit this social type of variation to posterity; thus social adaptation sets the direction of physical phylogeny and physical heredity is determined in part by this factor\" (Baldwin, 1896, p. 553).\n\nThe appearance of lactose tolerance in human populations with a long tradition of raising domesticated animals for milk production has been suggested as another example. This argument holds that a feedback loop operates whereby a dairy culture increases the selective advantage from this genetic trait, while the average population genotype increases the collective rewards of a dairy culture.\n\nInitially Baldwin's ideas were not incompatible with the prevailing, but uncertain, ideas about the mechanism of transmission of hereditary information and at least two other biologists put forward very similar ideas in 1896. In 1901, Maurice Maeterlinck referred to behavioural adaptations to prevailing climates in different species of bees as ‘what had merely been an idea, therefore, and opposed to instinct, has thus by slow degrees become an instinctive habit’. The Baldwin effect theory subsequently became more controversial, with scholars being split between \"Baldwin boosters\" and \"Baldwin skeptics\". The theory was first called the \"Baldwin effect\" by George Gaylord Simpson in 1953. Simpson \"admitted that the idea was theoretically consistent, that is, not inconsistent with the modern synthesis\", but he doubted that the phenomenon occurred very often, or if so, could be proven to occur. In his discussion of the reception of the Baldwin-effect theory Simpson points out that the theory appears to provide a reconciliation between a neo-Darwinian and a neo-Lamarckian approach and that \"Mendelism and later genetic theory so conclusively ruled out the extreme neo-Lamarckian position that reconciliation came to seem unnecessary\". In 1942, the evolutionary biologist Julian Huxley promoted the Baldwin effect as part of the modern synthesis, saying the concept had been unduly neglected by evolutionists.\n\nIn the 1960s, the evolutionary biologist Ernst Mayr contended that the Baldwin effect theory was untenable because\n\nIn 1987 Geoffrey Hinton and Steven Nowlan demonstrated by computer simulation that learning can accelerate evolution, and they associated this with the Baldwin effect.\n\nPaul Griffiths suggests two reasons for the continuing interest in the Baldwin effect. The first is the role \"mind\" is understood to play in the effect. The second is the connection between \"development\" and evolution in the effect. Baldwin’s account of how neurophysiological and conscious mental factors may contribute to the effect brings into focus the question of the possible survival value of consciousness.\n\nStill, observes David Depew, \"it is striking that a rather diverse lot of contemporary evolutionary theorists, most of whom regard themselves as supporters of the Modern Synthesis, have of late become 'Baldwin boosters These Baldwin boosters\nare typically evolutionary psychologists who are searching for scenarios in which a population can get itself by behavioral trial and error onto a \"hard to find\" part of the fitness landscape in which human brain, language, and mind can rapidly coevolve. They are searching for what Daniel Dennett, himself a Baldwin booster, calls an \"evolutionary crane,\" an instrument to do some heavy lifting fast.\nAccording to Daniel Dennett, recent work has rendered the Baldwin effect \"no longer a controversial wrinkle in orthodox Darwinism\". Potential genetic mechanisms underlying the Baldwin effect have been proposed for the evolution of natural (genetically-determinant) antibodies. In 2009, empirical evidence for the Baldwin effect was provided from the colonisation of North America by the house finch.\n\nThe Baldwin effect has been confused with, and sometimes conflated with, a different evolutionary theory also based on phenotypic plasticity, C. H. Waddington's genetic assimilation. The Baldwin effect includes genetic accommodation, of which one type is genetic assimilation.\n\n\n\n", "id": "1022185", "title": "Baldwin effect"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1242211", "text": "Exaptation\n\nExaptation (Stephen Jay Gould and Elisabeth Vrba's proposed replacement for what he considered the teleologically-loaded term \"pre-adaptation\") and the related term co-option describe a shift in the function of a trait during evolution. For example, a trait can evolve because it served one particular function, but subsequently it may come to serve another. Exaptations are common in both anatomy and behaviour. Bird feathers are a classic example: initially they may have evolved for temperature regulation, but later were adapted for flight. Interest in exaptation relates to both the process and products of evolution: the process that creates complex traits and the products (functions, anatomical structures, biochemicals, etc.) that may be imperfectly developed.\n\nThe idea that the function of a trait might shift during its evolutionary history originated with Charles Darwin (). For many years the phenomenon was labeled \"preadaptation\", but since this term suggests teleology in biology, appearing to conflict with natural selection, it has been replaced by the term exaptation.\n\nThe idea had been explored by several scholars when in 1982 Stephen Jay Gould and Elisabeth Vrba introduced the term \"exaptation\". However, this definition had two categories with different implications for the role of adaptation.\n(1) A character, previously shaped by natural selection for a particular function (an adaptation), is coopted for a new use—cooptation.\nThe definitions are silent as to whether exaptations had been shaped by natural selection after cooption, although Gould and Vrba cite examples (e.g., feathers) of traits shaped after cooption. Note that the selection pressure upon a trait is likely to change if it is (especially, primarily or solely) used for a new purpose, potentially initiating a different evolutionary trajectory.\n\nTo avoid these ambiguities, Buss et al. (1998) suggested the term \"co-opted adaptation\", which is limited to traits that evolved after cooption. However, the commonly used terms of \"exaptation\" and \"cooption\" are ambiguous in this regard.\n\nIn some circumstances, the \"pre-\" in preadaptation can be interpreted as applying, for non-teleological reasons, prior to the adaptation itself, creating a meaning for the term that is distinct from exaptation. For example, future environments (say, hotter or drier ones), may resemble those already encountered by a population at one of its current spatial or temporal margins. This is not actual foresight, but rather the luck of having adapted to a climate which later becomes more prominent. Cryptic genetic variation may have the most strongly deleterious mutations purged from it, leaving an increased chance of useful adaptations, but this represents selection acting on current genomes with consequences for the future, rather than foresight.\n\nFunction may not always come before form: developed structures could change or alter the primary functions they were intended for due to some structural or historical cause.\n\nExaptations include the co-option of feathers, which initially evolved for heat regulation, for display, and later for use in bird flight. Another example is the lungs of many basal fish, which evolved into the lungs of terrestrial vertebrates but also underwent exaptation to become the gas bladder, a buoyancy control organ, in derived fish. A third is the repurposing of two of the three bones in the reptilian jaw to become the malleus and incus of the mammalian ear, leaving the mammalian jaw with just one hinge.\n\nA behavioural example pertains to subdominant wolves licking the mouths of lead wolves as a sign of submissiveness. (Similarly, dogs, which are wolves who through a long process were domesticated, lick the faces of their human owners.) This trait can be explained as an exaptation of wolf pups licking the faces of adults to encourage them to regurgitate food.\n\nArthropods provide the earliest identifiable fossils of land animals, from about in the Late Silurian, and terrestrial tracks from about appear to have been made by arthropods. Arthropods were well pre-adapted to colonize land, because their existing jointed exoskeletons provided support against gravity and mechanical components that could interact to provide levers, columns and other means of locomotion that did not depend on submergence in water.\n\nMetabolism can be considered an important part of exaptation. As one of the oldest biological systems and being central to life on the Earth, studies have shown that metabolism may be able to use exaptation in order to be fit, given some new set of conditions or environment. Studies have shown that up to 44 carbon sources are viable for metabolism to successfully take place and that any one adaptation in these specific metabolic systems is due to multiple exaptations. Taking this perspective, exaptations are important in the origination of adaptations in general. A recent example comes from Richard Lenski's \"E. coli\" long-term evolution experiment, in which aerobic growth on citrate arose in one of twelve populations after 31,000 generations of evolution. Genomic analysis by Blount and colleagues showed that this novel trait was due to a gene duplication that caused oxic expression of a citrate transporter gene that is normally only expressed under anoxic conditions, thus exapting it for aerobic use. Metabolic systems have the potential to innovate without adaptive origins.\n\nGould and Brosius took the concept of exaptation to the genetic level. It is possible to look at a retroposon, originally thought to be simply junk DNA, and deduce that it may have gotten a new function to be termed as an exaptation. Given an emergency situation in the past, a species may have used junk DNA for a useful purpose in order to evolve and be able to survive. This may have occurred with mammalian ancestors when confronted with a large mass extinction about 250 million years ago and a substantial increase in the level of oxygen in Earth's atmosphere. More than 100 loci have been found to be conserved only among mammalian genomes and are thought to have essential roles in the generation of features such as the placenta, diaphragm, mammary glands, neocortex, and auditory ossicles. It is believed that as a result of exaptation, or making previously \"useless\" DNA into DNA that could be used in order to increase survival chance, mammals were able to generate new brain structures as well as behavior to better survive the mass extinction and adapt to new environments.\n\nIt was speculated by Gould and Vrba in one of the first papers written about exaptation, that when an exaptation arises, it may not be perfectly suited for its new role and may therefore develop new adaptations to promote its use in a better manner. In other words, the beginning of developing a particular trait starts out with a primary adaptation toward a fit or specific role, followed by a primary exaptation (a new role is derived using the existing feature but may not be perfect for it), which in turn leads to the development of a secondary adaptation (the feature is improved by natural selection for better performance), promoting further development of an exaptation, and so forth.\n\nOnce again, feathers are an important example, in that they may have first been adapted for thermoregulation and with time became useful for catching insects, and therefore served as a new feature for another benefit. For instance, large contour feathers with specific arrangements arose as an adaptation for catching insects more successfully, which eventually led to flight, since the larger feathers served better for that purpose.\n\nOne of the challenges to Darwin's theory of evolution was explaining how complex structures could evolve gradually, given that their incipient forms may have been inadequate to serve any function. As George Jackson Mivart (a critic of Darwin) pointed out, 5 percent of a bird wing would not be functional. The incipient form of complex traits would not have survived long enough to evolve to a useful form.\n\nAs Darwin elaborated in the last edition of \"The Origin of Species\", many complex traits evolved from earlier traits that had served different functions. By trapping air, primitive wings would have enabled birds to efficiently regulate their temperature, in part, by lifting up their feathers when too warm. Individual animals with more of this functionality would more successfully survive and reproduce, resulting in the proliferation and intensification of the trait.\n\nEventually, feathers became sufficiently large to enable some individuals to glide. These individuals would in turn more successfully survive and reproduce, resulting in the spread of this trait because it served a second and still more beneficial function: that of locomotion. Hence, the evolution of bird wings can be explained by a shifting in function from the regulation of temperature to flight.\n\nDarwin explained how the traits of living organisms are well-designed for their environment, but he also recognized that many traits are imperfectly designed. They appear to have been made from available material, that is, jury-rigged. Understanding exaptations may suggest hypotheses regarding subtleties in the adaptation. For instance, that feathers evolved initially for thermal regulation may help to explain some of their features unrelated to flight (Buss et al., 1998). However, this is readily explained by the fact that they serve a dual purpose.\n\nSome of the chemical pathways for physical pain and pain from social exclusion overlap. The physical pain system may have been co-opted to motivate social animals to respond to threats to their inclusion in the group.\n\n\n\n", "id": "1242211", "title": "Exaptation"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=367158", "text": "Breeding back\n\nBreeding back is a form of artificial selection by the deliberate selective breeding of domestic animals, in an attempt to achieve an animal breed with a phenotype that resembles a wildtype ancestor, usually one that is extinct in its wild form. Breeding back is not to be confused with dedomestication.\n\nIt must be kept in mind that a breeding-back breed may be very similar to the extinct wild type in phenotype, ecological niche, and to some extent genetics, but the initial gene pool of that wild type is lost forever with its extinction. It is not truly possible for a breeding back attempt to actually recreate an extinct wild type that is the breeding target, as an extinct wild type cannot be resurrected via selective breeding alone. Furthermore, even the outward authenticity of a bred-back type depends on the quality of the stock used as the foundation of the project. As a result, some breeds, like Heck cattle, are at best a vague look-alike of the extinct wildtype aurochs, according to the literature.\n\nIt is the target of breeding back to restore the wild traits that may have been preserved in domestic animals within one breeding lineage. Commonly, not only the phenotype but also the ecological capacity are considered in breeding back projects, because hardy breeding back results are used in certain conservation projects. In nature, usually only individuals suited to the natural circumstances can survive and reproduce, while humans select those with additional attractive, docile or productive characteristics. Therefore, selection criteria in nature versus those in domestic conditions are different and domesticated animals often differ significantly in phenotype, behaviour and genetics from their wild forerunners. It is the target of breeding back to re-create the wild traits that may have been preserved in domestic animals within one breeding lineage.\n\nIn many cases, the extinct wild type ancestors of a given species are known only through skeletons and, in some cases, historical descriptions, so their phenotype is not directly accessible. Therefore, there is no certainty of success with a breeding back attempt and the results must be reviewed with caution. In order to test genetic closeness, both mitochondrial DNA and nuclear DNA have to be accessible. However, success is possible: humans selected only for superficial characters and as a rule did not change inner mechanisms such as digestion. Further, since many domestic animals show a behaviour that is derived from their wild ancestors (such as the herding instinct of cattle or the social instincts of dogs), and are fit to survive under natural circumstances, as evidenced by the many feral populations of many domestic animals, it can be presumed that back-bred animals will function like their wild ancestors. For example, food choice should be the same in domestic and wild types. Natural selection could serve as an additional tool in creating authentic robustness, behaviour and maybe also phenotype. For large herbivores, a sufficient predator population would also be necessary to support such a process, but this predator population is largely not present in today's Europe, where many breeding back projects are conducted.\n\nThere is a difference between creating a look-alike breed from domestic animals and creating a look-alike via artificial selection of individuals of a different species or subspecies that may resemble the animal that is targeted. \n\nFor example, the Quagga Project is trying to breed animals which strongly resemble the original Quagga of South Africa. The quagga was a subspecies of the plains zebra and has no descendants. Accordingly, the Project is limited to selecting for the physical appearance of the original, as illustrated by twenty three mounted specimens, contemporary paintings and written accounts. \n\nHowever, the two most noticeable characteristics of the quagga, fewer stripes and darker pelage, are frequently observed to varying degrees in wild plains zebra populations. Animals with these characteristic are included in the Quagga Project breeding programme. \n\nAfter nearly thirty years of selective breeding, to concentrate these characteristics, recent foals show a marked resemblance to the original.\n\nBred-back breeds are interesting for conservation biology since they may fill an ecological gap that has been left due to the extinction of the wildtypes due to hunting by humans. As long as food choice, behaviour, robustness, defence against predators, hunting or foraging instincts and phenotype are the same as in the wild type, it will function like it in the wilderness. Releasing such animals into the wild would fill the previously empty niche and allows a natural dynamic between the species of the ecosystem to re-evolve. However, breeding-back attempts do not always result in an animal that is closer to the wild type than other domestic breeds. For example, Heck cattle bear less resemblance to the aurochs than many Iberian fighting cattle do.\n\nIdeas for creating an aurochs-like animal from domestic cattle have been around since 1835. In the 1920s, Heinz and Lutz Heck tried to breed a look-alike using central European dairy breeds and southern European cattle. The result, Heck cattle, are hardy, but differ from the aurochs in many respects, although a resemblance in colour and sometimes also horns has been achieved. From 1996 onwards, Heck cattle have been crossed with primitive Iberian breeds like Sayaguesa Cattle and Fighting cattle, and the very large Italian breed Chianina in a number of German reserves in order to enhance the resemblance to the aurochs. The results are called Taurus cattle, which are larger and more long-legged than Heck cattle and have a more aurochs-like horn shape. Another project to achieve a type of cattle that resembles the aurochs is TaurOs Project, using primitive and hardy southern European breeds and also Scottish Highland cattle. These Tauros cattle are planned to be established in various European natural reserves.\n\nThe Polish Konik horse is often erroneously considered the result of a breeding-back experiment to \"recreate\" the phenotype of the Tarpan, the European wild horse. The Konik is actually a hardy landrace breed originating in Poland which was called \"Panje horse\" before agriculturist Tadeusz Vetulani coined the name \"Konik\" in the 1920s. Vetulani did start an experiment trying to reconstruct the Tarpan using Koniks, but his stock only had a minor contribution to the modern Konik population.\n\nHowever, during World War II, the Heck brothers crossed Koniks with Przewalski's horses and also other ponies like Icelandic horses and Gotland ponies; the result is now called the Heck Horse. During the last decades, Heck horses have continuously been crossed with Koniks, so that their phenotype now is nearly indistinguishable, except that the Heck horse has a slenderer build on average.\n\nBesides the Konik-type horses, the Exmoor Pony that still lives in a semi-feral state in some parts of Southern England has also been claimed to be closer to the European wild horse as it carries pangare coloration and has a resemblance to the horses in Lascaux cave paintings.\n\nAlthough the wolf, the wild ancestor of domestic dogs, is not extinct, its phenotype is the target of several developmental breeds including the Northern Inuit Dog and the Tamaskan Dog. They are all crossbreeds of German Shepherds, Alaskan Malamutes and huskies, selected for phenotypic wolf characteristics. Therefore, these breeds are breeding-back attempts as well. The Dire Wolf Project, started in 1988, the dire wolf, an extinct ancestor of wolves aims to bring it back by breeding different dog breeds that resemble it.\n\nAlthough extinct, the Japanese wolf DNA survives in the modern domestic Shikoku Inu. It is thought that crossing this breed with some subspecies of Asian Wolf would result in a authentic analogue to fill the ecological niche left by the absence of the apex predator.\n\n\n\n", "id": "367158", "title": "Breeding back"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3207752", "text": "Darwinian puzzle\n\nA Darwinian puzzle is a trait that appears to reduce the fitness of individuals that possess it. Such traits attract the attention of evolutionary biologists. Several human traits pose challenges to evolutionary thinking, as they are relatively prevalent but are associated with lower reproductive success through reduced fertility and/or longevity. Some of the classic examples include: left handedness, menopause, and mental disorders. These traits are also found in animals, a peacock shows an example of a trait that may reduce its fitness. The bigger the tail, the easier it is seen by predators and it also may hinder the movement of the peacock. Darwin, in fact, solved this \"puzzle\" by explaining the peacock's tail as evidence of sexual selection; a bigger tail confers evolutionary fitness on the male by allowing it to attract more females than other males with shorter tails.. The phrase \"Darwinian puzzle\" itself is rare and of unclear origin; it's typically talked about in the context of Animal Behavior.\n\nDarwinian puzzles are evident in nature, even though it appears to reduce the fitness of the individual that possesses it. Different individuals use the odd phenomenon in particular ways such as toxins, fitness demonstration, and mimicry.\n\nThere are a few contributing factors in biology which may affect Darwinian puzzles.\nThis may be based on common descent. Animals may share 1/4, 1/2, or even in some cases all of their genes with others. Identical twins have a coefficient of relatedness of r=1. Full siblings have a coefficient of relatedness of r=.50, and half siblings and first cousins have a coefficient of relatedness of r=.25. Depending on how related two animals are, they may be more likely to act altruistically to one another. Even if it is of no benefit to themselves, it helps to promote survival of at least some of their genes as they are shared with others closely related to them. The formula to calculate coefficient of relatedness is (R) = Σ (1/2)\nHamilton's rule is often used to explain altruism in populations based upon relatedness. It can be represented by the formula (rB > C) where r represents relatedness, B represents benefit to the recipient, and C represents cost to the altruist. Animals may use Hamilton's rule in many instances where it will not promote their own fitness, but will have an evolutionary effect on the overall fitness of the species in general.\n\nThe following phenomena are sometimes called Darwinian puzzles:\n\n", "id": "3207752", "title": "Darwinian puzzle"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2090253", "text": "Intragenomic conflict\n\nIntragenomic conflict refers to the evolutionary phenomenon where genes have phenotypic effects that promote their own transmission in detriment of the transmission of other genes that reside in the same genome. The selfish gene theory postulates that natural selection will increase the frequency of those genes whose phenotypic effects cause their transmission to new organisms, and most genes achieve this by cooperating with other genes in the same genome to build an organism capable of reproducing and/or helping kin to reproduce. The assumption of the prevalence of intragenomic cooperation underlies the organism-centered concept of inclusive fitness. However, conflict among genes in the same genome may arise both in events related to reproduction (a gene may \"cheat\" and increase its own presence in gametes or offspring above the expected according to fair Mendelian segregation and fair gametogenesis) and altruism (genes in the same genome may disagree on how to value other organisms in the context of helping kin because coefficients of relatedness diverge between genes in the same genome).\n\nAutosomic genes usually have the same mode of transmission in sexually reproducing species due to the fairness of Mendelian segregation, but conflicts among alleles of autosomic genes may arise when an allele cheats during gametogenesis (segregation distortion) or eliminates embryos that don't contain it (lethal maternal effects). An allele may also directly convert its rival allele into a copy of itself (homing endonucleases). Finally, mobile genetic elements completely bypass Mendelian segregation, being able to insert new copies of themselves into new positions in the genome (transposons).\n\nIn principle, the two parental alleles have equal probabilities of being present in the mature gamete. However, there are several mechanisms that lead to an unequal transmission of parental alleles from parents to offspring. One example is a gene, called a \"segregation distorter\", that \"cheats\" during meiosis or gametogenesis and thus is present in more than half of the functional gametes. The most studied examples are \"sd\" in \"Drosophila melanogaster\" (fruit fly), \"t\" haplotype in \"Mus musculus\" (mouse) and \"sk\" in \"Neurospora\" spp. (fungus). Possible examples have also been reported in humans.\nSegregation distorters that are present in sexual chromosomes (as is the case with the X chromosome in several \"Drosophila\" species) are denominated sex-ratio distorters, as they induce a sex-ratio bias in the offspring of the carrier individual.\n\nThe most simple model of meiotic drive involves two tightly linked loci: a \"Killer\" locus and a \"Target\" locus. The segregation distorter set is composed by the allele \"Killer\" (in the \"Killer\" locus) and the allele \"Resistant\" (in the \"Target\" locus), while its rival set is composed by the alleles \"Non-killer\" and \"Non-resistant\". So, the segregation distorter set produces a toxin to which it is itself resistant, while its rival is not. Thus, it kills those gametes containing the rival set and increases in frequency. The tight linkage between these loci is crucial, so these genes usually lie on low-recombination regions of the genome.\n\nOther systems do not involve gamete destruction, but rather use the asymmetry of meiosis in females: the driving allele ends up in the oocyte instead of in the polar bodies with a probability greater than one half. This is termed true meiotic drive, as it does not rely on a post-meiotic mechanism. The best-studied examples include the neocentromeres (knobs) of maize, as well as several chromosomal rearrangements in mammals. The general molecular evolution of centromeres is likely to involve such mechanisms.\n\nThe Medea gene causes the death of progeny from a heterozygous mother that do not inherit it. It occurs in the flour beetle (\"Tribolium castaneum\"). Maternal-effect selfish genes have been successfully synthesized in the lab.\n\nTransposons are autonomous replicating genes that encode the ability to move to new positions in the genome and therefore accumulate in the genomes. They replicate themselves in spite of being detrimental to the rest of the genome.\nThey are often called 'jumping genes' or parasitic DNA and were discovered by Barbara McClintock in 1944.\n\nHoming endonuclease genes (HEG) convert their rival allele into a copy of themselves, and are thus inherited by nearly all meiotic daughter cells of a heterozygote cell. They achieve this by encoding an endonuclease which breaks the rival allele. This break is repaired by using the sequence of the HEG as template.\n\nHEGs encode sequence-specific endonucleases. The recognition sequence (RS) is 15–30 bp long and usually occurs once in the genome. HEGs are located in the middle of their own recognition sequences.\nMost HEGs are encoded by self-splicing introns (group I & II) and inteins. Inteins are internal protein fragments produced from protein splicing and usually contain endonuclease and splicing activities.\nThe allele without the HEGs are cleaved by the homing endonuclease and the double-strand break are repaired by homologous recombination (gene conversion) using the allele containing HEGs as template. Both chromosomes will contain the HEGs after repair.\n\nB-chromosomes are nonessential chromosomes; not homologous with any member of the normal (A) chromosome set; morphologically and structurally different from the A's; and they are transmitted at higher-than-expected frequencies, leading to their accumulation in progeny. In some cases, there is strong evidence to support the contention that they are simply \"selfish\" and that they exist as parasitic chromosomes. They are found in all major taxonomic groupings of both plants and animals.\n\nSince nuclear and cytoplasmic genes usually have different modes of transmission, intragenomic conflicts between them may arise. Mitochondrias and chloroplasts are two examples of sets of cytoplasmic genes that commonly have exclusive maternal inheritance, similar to endosymbiont parasites in arthropods, like \"Wolbachia\".\n\nAnisogamy generally produces zygotes that inherit cytoplasmic elements exclusively from the female gamete. Thus, males represent dead-ends to these genes. Because of this fact, cytoplasmic genes have evolved a number of mechanisms to increase the production of female descendants and eliminate offspring not containing them.\n\nMale organisms are converted into females by cytoplasmic inherited protists (Microsporidia) or bacteria (\"Wolbachia\"), regardless of nuclear sex-determining factors. This occurs in amphipod and isopod Crustacea and Lepidoptera.\n\nMale embryos (in the case of cytoplasmic inherited bacteria) or male larvae (in the case of Microsporidia) are killed. In the case of embryo death, this diverts investment from males to females who can transmit these cytoplasmic elements (for instance, in ladybird beetles, infected female hosts eat their dead male brothers, which is positive from the viewpoint of the bacterium). In the case of microsporidia-induced larval death, the agent is transmitted out of the male lineage (through which it cannot be transmitted) into the environment, where it may be taken up again infectiously by other individuals. Male-killing occurs in many insects. In the case of male embryo death, a variety of bacteria have been implicated, including \"Wolbachia\".\n\nIn some cases anther tissue (male gametophyte) is killed by mitochondria in monoecious angiosperms, increasing energy and material spent in developing female gametophytes. This leads to a shift from monoecy to gynodioecy, where part of the plants in the population are male-sterile.\n\nIn certain haplodiploid Hymenoptera and mites, in which males are produced asexually, \"Wolbachia\" and \"Cardinium\" can induce duplication of the chromosomes and thus convert the organisms into females. The cytoplasmic bacterium forces haploid cells to go through incomplete mitosis to produce diploid cells which therefore will be female. This produces an entirely female population. Interestingly, if antibiotics are administered to populations which have become asexual in this way, they revert to sexuality instantly, as the cytoplasmic bacteria forcing this behaviour upon them are removed.\n\nIn many arthropods, zygotes produced by sperm of infected males and ova of non-infected females can be killed by \"Wolbachia\" or \"Cardinium\".\n\nConflict between chromosomes has been proposed as an element in the evolution of sex.\n\n\n", "id": "2090253", "title": "Intragenomic conflict"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1039033", "text": "Cope's rule\n\nCope's rule, named after American paleontologist Edward Drinker Cope, postulates that population lineages tend to increase in body size over evolutionary time. It was never actually stated by Cope, although he favoured the occurrence of linear evolutionary trends. It is sometimes also known as the Cope-Depéret rule, because Charles Depéret explicitly advocated the idea. Theodor Eimer had also done so earlier. The term \"Cope's rule\" was apparently coined by Bernhard Rensch, based on the fact that Depéret had \"lionized Cope\" in his book. While the rule has been demonstrated in many instances, it does not hold true at all taxonomic levels, or in all clades. Larger body size is associated with increased fitness for a number of reasons, although there are also some disadvantages both on an individual and on a clade level: clades comprising larger individuals are more prone to extinction, which may act to limit the maximum size of organisms.\n\nDirectional selection appears to act on organisms' size, whereas it exhibits a far smaller effect on other morphological traits, though it is possible that this perception may be a result of sample bias. This selectional pressure can be explained by a number of advantages, both in terms of mating success and survival rate.\n\nFor example, larger organisms find it easier to avoid or fight off predators and capture prey, to reproduce, to kill competitors, to survive temporary lean times, and to resist rapid climatic changes. They may also potentially benefit from better thermal efficiency, increased intelligence, and a longer lifespan.\n\nOffsetting these advantages, larger organisms require more food and water, and shift from r to K-selection. Their longer generation time means a longer period of reliance on the mother, and on a macroevolutionary scale restricts the clade's ability to evolve rapidly in response to changing environments.\n\nLeft unfettered, the trend of ever-larger size would produce organisms of gargantuan proportions. Therefore, some factors must limit this process.\nAt one level, it is possible that the clade's increased vulnerability to extinction, as its members become larger, means that no taxon survives long enough for individuals to reach huge sizes. There are probably also physically imposed limits to the size of some organisms; for instance, insects must be small enough for oxygen to diffuse to all parts of their bodies, flying birds must be light enough to fly, and the length of giraffes' necks may be limited by the amount of pressure it is possible for their hearts to generate. Finally, there may be a competitive element, in that changes in size are necessarily accompanied by changes in ecological niche. For example, terrestrial carnivores over 21 kg almost always prey on organisms larger, not smaller, than themselves. If such a niche is already occupied, competitive pressure may oppose the directional selection. The three Canidae clades show a trend towards larger size before becoming extinct.\n\nCope recognised that clades of Cenozoic mammals appeared to originate as small individuals, and that body mass increased through a clade's history. Discussing the case of canid evolution in North America, Blaire Van Valkenburgh of UCLA and coworkers state:\nIn some cases, the increase in body size may represent a passive, rather than an active, trend. In other words, the maximum size increases, but the minimum size does not; this is usually a result of size varying pseudo-randomly rather than directed evolution. This does not fall into Cope's rule \"sensu stricto\", but is considered by many workers to be an example of \"Cope's rule \"sensu lato\"\". In other cases, an increase in size may in fact represent a transition to an optimal body size, and not imply that populations always develop to a larger size.\n\nHowever, many palaeobiologists are skeptical of the validity of Cope's rule, which may merely represent a statistical artefact. Purported examples of Cope's rule often assume that the stratigraphic age of fossils is proportional to their \"clade rank\", a measure of how derived they are from an ancestral state; this relationship is in fact quite weak. Counterexamples to Cope's rule are common throughout geological time; although size increase does occur more often than not, it is by no means universal. For example, among genera of Cretaceous molluscs, an increase in size is no more common than stasis or a decrease. In many cases, Cope's rule only operates at certain taxonomic levels (for example, an order may obey Cope's rule, while its constituent families do not), or more generally, it may apply to only some clades of a taxon.\n\nDespite many counter-examples, Cope's rule is supported in many instances. For example, all marine invertebrate phyla except the molluscs show a size increase between the Cambrian and Permian. Collectively, dinosaurs exhibit an increase in body length over their evolution. Cope's rule also appears to hold in clades where a constraint on size is expected. For instance, one may expect the size of birds to be constrained, as larger masses mean more energy must be expended in flight. Birds have been suggested to follow Cope's law, although a subsequent reanalysis of the same data suggested otherwise.\n\nAn extensive study published in 2015 supports the presence of a trend toward larger body size in marine animals during the Phanerozoic. However, this trend was present mainly in the Paleozoic and Cenozoic; the Mesozoic was a period of relative stasis. The trend is not attributable simply to neutral drift in body size from small ancestors, and was mainly driven by a greater rate of diversification in classes of larger mean size. A smaller component of the overall trend is due to trends of increasing size within individual families.\n", "id": "1039033", "title": "Cope's rule"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1357154", "text": "Parallel evolution\n\nParallel evolution is the development of a similar trait in related, but distinct, species descending from the same ancestor, but from different clades.\n\nGiven a particular trait that occurs in each of two lineages descended from a specified ancestor, it is possible in theory to define parallel and convergent evolutionary trends strictly, and distinguish them clearly from one another. However the criteria for defining convergent as opposed to parallel evolution often are unclear in practice, so that arbitrary diagnosis is common in some cases.\n\nWhen two species are similar in a particular character, evolution is defined as parallel if the ancestors shared that similarity; if they did not, the evolution of that character in those species is defined as convergent. However, this distinction is not clear-cut. For one thing, the stated conditions are partly a matter of degree; all organisms share more or less recent common ancestors. In evolutionary biology the question of how far back to look for similar ancestors, and how similar those ancestors need be for one to consider parallel evolution to have taken place, cannot always be resolved. Some scientists accordingly have argued that parallel evolution and convergent evolution are more or less indistinguishable. Others insist that in practice we should not shy away from the gray area because many important distinctions between parallel and convergent evolution remain. \n\nWhen the ancestral forms are unspecified or unknown, or the range of traits considered is not clearly specified, the distinction between parallel and convergent evolution becomes more subjective. For instance, Richard Dawkins in \"The Blind Watchmaker\" describes the striking similarity between placental and marsupial forms as the outcome of convergent evolution, because mammals on their respective ancestral continents had a long evolutionary history prior to the extinction of the dinosaurs. That period of separation would have permitted the accumulation of many relevant differences. Stephen Jay Gould differed; he described some of the same examples as having started from the common ancestor of all marsupials and placentals, and hence amounting to parallel evolution. And certainly, whenever similarities can be described in concept as having evolved from a common attribute deriving from a single remote ancestral line, that legitimately may be regarded as parallel evolution.\n\nIn contrast, where quite different structures clearly have been co-opted to a similar form and function, one must necessarily regard the evolution as convergent. For example, consider \"Mixotricha paradoxa\", a eukaryotic microbe which has assembled a system of rows of apparent cilia and basal bodies closely resembling the system in ciliates. However, on inspection it turns out that in \"Mixotricha paradoxa\", what appear to be cilia actually are smaller symbiont microorganisms; there is no question of parallel evolution in such a case. Again, the differently oriented tails of fish and whales derived at vastly different times from radically different ancestors and any similarity in the resultant descendants must therefore have evolved convergently; any case in which lineages do not evolve together at the same time in the same ecospace might be described as convergent evolution at some point in time. \n\nThe definition of a trait is crucial in deciding whether a change is seen as divergent, or as parallel or convergent. For example, the evolution of the sesamoid \"thumb\" of the giant panda certainly is not parallel to that of the thumbs of primates, particularly hominins, and it also differs morphologically from primate thumbs, but from some points of view it might be regarded as convergent in function and appearance. \n\nAgain, in the image above, note that since serine and threonine possess similar structures with an alcohol side chain, the example marked \"\"divergent\"\" would be termed \"\"parallel\"\" if the amino acids were grouped by similarity instead of being considered individually. As another example, if genes in two species independently become restricted to the same region of the animals through regulation by a certain transcription factor, this may be described as a case of parallel evolution - but examination of the actual DNA sequence will probably show only divergent changes in individual basepair positions, since a new transcription factor binding site can be added in a wide range of places within the gene with similar effect.\n\nA similar situation occurs considering the homology of morphological structures. For example, many insects possess two pairs of flying wings. In beetles, the first pair of wings is hardened into elytra, wing covers with little role in flight, while in flies the second pair of wings is condensed into small halteres used for balance. If the two pairs of wings are considered as interchangeable, homologous structures, this may be described as a parallel reduction in the number of wings, but otherwise the two changes are each divergent changes in one pair of wings.\n\nSimilar to convergent evolution, evolutionary relay describes how independent species acquire similar characteristics through their evolution in similar ecosystems, but not at the same time, such as (dorsal fins of sharks, cetaceans and ichthyosaurs).\n\n\nA number of examples of parallel evolution are provided by the two main branches of the mammals, the placentals and marsupials, which have followed independent evolutionary pathways following the break-up of land-masses such as Gondwanaland roughly 100 million years ago. In South America, marsupials and placentals shared the ecosystem (prior to the Great American Interchange); in Australia, marsupials prevailed; and in the Old World and North America the placentals won out. However, in all these localities mammals were small and filled only limited places in the ecosystem until the mass extinction of dinosaurs sixty-five million years ago. At this time, mammals on all three landmasses began to take on a much wider variety of forms and roles. While some forms were unique to each environment, surprisingly similar animals have often emerged in two or three of the separated continents. Examples of these include the placental sabre-toothed cats (Machairodontinae) and the South American marsupial sabre-tooth \"(Thylacosmilus)\"; the Tasmanian wolf and the European wolf; likewise marsupial and placental moles, flying squirrels, and (arguably) mice.\n\n\n", "id": "1357154", "title": "Parallel evolution"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1889289", "text": "Character displacement\n\nCharacter displacement is the phenomenon where differences among similar species whose distributions overlap geographically are accentuated in regions where the species co-occur, but are minimized or lost where the species’ distributions do not overlap. This pattern results from evolutionary change driven by biological competition among species for a limited resource (e.g. food). The rationale for character displacement stems from the competitive exclusion principle, also called Gause's Law, which contends that to coexist in a stable environment two competing species must differ in their respective ecological niche; without differentiation, one species will eliminate or exclude the other through competition.\n\nCharacter displacement was first explicitly explained by William L. Brown Jr. and E. O. Wilson in 1956: \"Two closely related species have overlapping ranges. In the parts of the ranges where one species occurs alone, the populations of that species are similar to the other species and may even be very difficult to distinguish from it. In the area of overlap, where the two species occur together, the populations are more divergent and easily distinguished, i.e., they 'displace' one another in one or more characters. The characters involved can be morphological, ecological, behavioral, or physiological; they are assumed to be genetically based.\"\n\nBrown and Wilson used the term character displacement to refer to instances of both reproductive character displacement, or reinforcement of reproductive barriers, and ecological character displacement driven by competition. As the term character displacement is commonly used, it generally refers to morphological differences due to competition. Brown and Wilson viewed character displacement as a phenomenon involved in speciation, stating, \"we believe that it is a common aspect of geographical speciation, arising most often as a product of the genetic and ecological interaction of two (or more) newly evolved, cognate species [derived from the same immediate parental species] during their period of first contact.\" While character displacement is important in various scenarios of speciation, including adaptive radiations like the cichlid fish faunas in the rift lakes of East Africa, it also plays an important role in structuring communities. It also plays a role in speciation by reinforcement in such that allopatric populations overlapping in sympatry exhibit greater trait divergence. The results of numerous studies contribute evidence that character displacement often influences the evolution of resource acquisition among members of an ecological guild.\n\nCompetitive release, defined as the expansion of an ecological niche in the absence of a competitor, is essentially the mirror image of character displacement. It too was described by Brown and Wilson: “Two closely related species are distinct where they occur together, but where one member of the pair occurs alone it converges toward the second, even to the extent of being nearly identical with it in some characters.”\n\n“Character displacement is the situation in which, when two species of animals overlap geographically, the differences between them are accentuated in the zone of sympatry and weakened or lost entirely in the parts of their ranges outside this zone”. While the term “ecological character displacement” first appeared in the scientific literature in 1956, the idea has earlier roots. For example, Joseph Grinnell, in the classic paper that set forth the concept of the ecological niche, stated, “It is, of course, axiomatic that no two species regularly established in a single fauna have precisely the same niche requirements.” The existence of character displacement is evidence that the two species do not completely overlap in their niche requirement.\n\nFollowing the dissemination of the concept, character displacement was viewed as an important force in structuring ecological communities, and biologists identified numerous examples. During the late 1970s and early 1980s, however, the role of competition and character displacement in structuring communities was questioned and its importance greatly downgraded. Many found the early examples unconvincing and suggested it to be a rare phenomenon. Criticisms with earlier studies included the lack of rigor in statistical analyses and the use of poorly rationalized characters. Additionally, theory seemed to indicate that the conditions that allowed character displacement to occur were limited. This scrutiny helped motivate theoretical and methodological advances as well as the development of a more rigorous framework for testing character displacement.\n\nSix criteria have been developed to establish character displacement as the mechanism for differences between sympatric species. These include: (1) differences between sympatric taxa are greater than expected by chance; (2) differences in character states are related to differences in resource use; (3) resources are limiting, and interspecific competition for these resources is a function of character similarity; (4) resource distribution are the same in sympatry and allopatry such that differences in character states are not due to differences in resource availability; (5) differences must have evolved in situ; (6) differences must be genetically based. Rigorously testing these criteria necessitates a synthetic approach, combining areas of research like community ecology, functional morphology, adaptation, quantitative genetics and phylogenetic systematics, While satisfying all six criteria in a single study of character displacement is not often feasible, they provide the necessary context for researching character displacement.\n\nCharacter displacement has indicated to be a major factor in beak size among finches located in the Galápagos Islands and Hawaiian Islands.\n\nStudies have been performed in a wide variety of taxa—a few groups having disproportionately contributed to the understanding of character displacement: mammalian carnivores, Galapagos finches, \"Anolis\" lizards on islands, three-spined stickleback fish, and snails.\n\nIn the initial explication of character displacement, many of the examples set forth as potential evidence for character displacement were observations between multiple pairs of birds. These included rock nuthatches in Asia, Australian honeyeaters of the genus \"Myzantha\", Australian parrots, shearwaters in the Cape Verde Islands, flycatchers of the Bismarck Archipelago and notably, Darwin's finches in the Galapagos. David Lack found that when the two species \"Geospiza fortis\" and \"G. fuliginosa\" occurred on large islands together, they could be distinguished unequivocally by beak size. When either one occurred by itself on a smaller island, however, the beak size was intermediate in size relative to when the two co-occurred. Similarly, Peter and Rosemary Grant found that a \"Geospiza fortis\" island population diverged in beak size (due to high mortality) from competitor \"G. magnirostris\" in a year with low food supply, apparently due to increased competition for larger seeds that both species fed on. Most character displacement studies focus on morphological differences in feeding apparatus rather than on those relating to habitat use. However, comparisons of micro-habitat use and morphological adaptations of Western and Eastern Rock Nuthatches indicate that these two species show spatial niche segregation in addition to trophic niche segregation.\n\nIt is often assumed that closely related species are more likely to compete than are more distantly related species, and hence many researchers investigate character displacement among species in the same genus. While character displacement was originally discussed in the context of very closely related species, evidence suggests that even interactions among distantly related species can result in character displacement. Finches and bees in the Galapagos provide support for this. Two finch species (\"Geospiza fuliginosa\" and \"G. difficilis\") exploit more flower nectar on islands where the lager carpenter bee (\"Xylocopa darwini\") is absent than on islands with the bees. Individual finches that harvest nectar are smaller than members of the same species that do not.\n\nThe lizard genus \"Anolis\" on the islands in the Caribbean has also been the subject of numerous studies investigating the role of competition and character displacement in community structure. Lesser Antilles islands can only support \"Anolis\" species of different sizes, and the relative importance of character displacement versus size at colonization in determining invasion success has been explored and debated.\n\nThe Appalachian salamanders \"Plethodon hoffmani\" and \"P. cinereus\" display no morphological differences, eating habits, or resource use exploitation differences among allopatric populations; when the species occurs in sympatry; however, they exhibit morphological differentiation that is associated with segregation in prey size. Where these two species co-occur, \"P. hoffmani\" has a faster closing jaw required for larger prey, and \"P. cinereus\" has a slower, stronger jaw for smaller prey. Other studies have found \"Plethodon\" salamander species that demonstrate character displacement from aggressive behavioral interference rather than exploitation. That is, morphological character displacement between the two species is due to aggressive interaction between them rather than the exploitation of different food resources.\n\nOn Okinawa Island, the snail species \"Satsuma largillierti\" lives on the eastern half of the island, while \"Satsuma eucosmia\" lives on the eastern half. Both populations overlap in sympatry along the middle of the island, where the penis length of the species differs significantly wherer they meet in sympatry. The snails' penis lengths exhibit divergence, suggesting reproductive character displacement of this trait.\n\nThreespine sticklebacks (\"Gasterosteus\" spp.) in post-glacial lakes in western Canada have contributed significantly to recent research of character displacement. Both observations of natural populations and manipulative experiments show that when two recently evolved species occur in a single lake, two morphologies are selected for: a limnetic form that feeds in open water and a benthic form that feeds at the lake bottom. They differ in size, shape and the number and length of gill rakers, all of which is related to divergence in their diet. Hybrids between the two forms are selected against. When only one species inhabits a lake, that fish displays an intermediate morphology. Studies on other fish species have shown similar patterns of selection for benthic and limnetic morphologies, which can also lead to sympatric speciation.\n\nIntroduced species have also provided recent “natural experiments” to investigate how rapidly character displacement can affect evolutionary change. When American mink (\"Mustela vison\") were introduced in north-eastern Belarus, the native European mink (\"Mustela lutreola\") increased in size, and the introduced mink decreased in size. This displacement was observed within a ten-year study, demonstrating that competition can drive rapid evolutionary change.\n\n\n", "id": "1889289", "title": "Character displacement"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1484741", "text": "Carcinisation\n\nIn evolutionary biology, carcinisation (or carcinization) is a hypothesised process whereby a crustacean evolves into a crab-like form from a non-crab-like form. The term was introduced by L. A. Borradaile, who described it as \"one of the many attempts of Nature to evolve a crab\".\n\nCarcinisation is believed to have occurred independently in at least five groups of decapod crustaceans, most notably king crabs, which most scientists believe evolved from hermit crab ancestors. The other examples are the family Porcellanidae, or porcelain crabs (which are closely related to squat lobsters), the hairy stone crab \"Lomis hirta\", the coconut crab \"Birgus latro\", and true crabs. The example of king crabs (family Lithodidae) evolving from hermit crabs has been particularly well studied and, although some doubt this theory, there is considerable evidence in its favour. For example: most hermit crabs are asymmetrical, so that they fit well into spiral snail shells; the abdomens of king crabs, even though they do not use snail shells for shelter, are also asymmetrical.\n\nAn exceptional form of carcinisation, termed \"hypercarcinisation\", is seen in the porcelain crab \"Allopetrolisthes spinifrons\". In addition to the shortened body form, \"A. spinifrons\" also shows similar sexual dimorphism to that seen in true crabs, where males have a shorter pleon than females.\n", "id": "1484741", "title": "Carcinisation"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1109200", "text": "Unit of selection\n\nA unit of selection is a biological entity within the hierarchy of biological organization (for example, an entity such as: a self-reproducing molecule, a gene, a cell, an organism, a group, or a species) that is subject to natural selection. There is debate among evolutionary biologists about the extent to which evolution has been shaped by selective pressures acting at these different levels.\n\nThere is debate over the relative importance of the units themselves. For instance, is it group or individual selection that has driven the evolution of altruism? Where altruism reduces the fitness of \"individuals\", individual-centered explanations for the evolution of altruism become complex and rely on the use of game theory, for instance; see kin selection and group selection. There also is debate over the definition of the units themselves, and the roles for selection and replication, and whether these roles may change in the course of evolution.\n\nTwo useful introductions to the fundamental theory underlying the unit of selection issue and debate, which also present examples of multi-level selection from the entire range of the biological hierarchy (typically with entities at level \"N\"-1 competing for increased representation, i.e., higher frequency, at the immediately higher level \"N\", e.g., organisms in populations or cell lineages in organisms), are Richard Lewontin's classic piece \"The Units of Selection\" and John Maynard-Smith and Eörs Szathmáry's co-authored book, \"The Major Transitions in Evolution\". As a theoretical introduction to what is at stake vis-a-vis units of selection, Lewontin writes:\nThe generality of the principles of natural selection means that any entities in nature that have variation, reproduction, and heritability may evolve. ...the principles can be applied equally to genes, organisms, populations, species, and at opposite ends of the scale, prebiotic molecules and ecosystems.\" (1970, pp. 1-2)\n\nElisabeth Lloyd's book \"The Structure and Confirmation of Evolutionary Theory\" provides a basic \"philosophical\" introduction to the debate.\n\nBelow, cases of selection at the genic, cellular, individual and group level from within the multi-level selection perspective are presented and discussed.\n\nGeorge C. Williams in his influential book \"Adaptation and Natural Selection\" was one of the first to present a gene-centered view of evolution with the gene as the unit of selection, arguing that a unit of selection should exhibit a high degree of permanence.\n\nRichard Dawkins has written several books popularizing and expanding the idea. According to Dawkins, genes cause phenotypes and a gene is 'judged' by its phenotypic effects. Dawkins distinguishes entities which survive or fail to survive (\"replicators\") from entities with temporary existence that interact directly with the environment (\"vehicles\"). Genes are \"replicators\" whereas individuals and groups of individuals are \"vehicles\". Dawkins argues that, although they are both aspects of the same process, \"replicators\" rather than \"vehicles\" should be preferred as units of selection. This is because replicators, owing to their permanence, should be regarded as the ultimate beneficiaries of adaptations. Genes are replicators and therefore the gene is the unit of selection. Dawkins further expounded this view in an entire chapter called 'God's utility function' in the book \"River Out of Eden\" where he explained that genes alone have utility functions.\n\nSome clear-cut examples of selection at the level of the gene include meiotic drive and retrotransposons. In both of these cases, gene sequences increase their relative frequency in a population without necessarily providing benefits at other levels of organization. Meiotic-drive mutations (see segregation distortion) manipulate the machinery of chromosomal segregation so that chromosomes carrying the mutation are later found in more than half of the gametes produced by individuals heterozygous for the mutation, and for this reason the frequency of the mutation increases in the population.\n\nRetrotransposons are DNA sequences that, once replicated by the cellular machinery, insert themselves in the genome more or less randomly. Such insertions can be very mutagenic and thus reduce drastically individual fitness, so that there is strong selection against elements that are very active. Meiotic-drive alleles have also been shown strongly to reduce individual fitness, clearly exemplifying the potential conflict between selection at different levels.\n\nAccording to the RNA world hypothesis, RNA sequences performing both enzymatic and information storage roles in autocatalytic sets were an early unit of selection and evolution that would later transition into living cells. It is still possible that RNA-based evolution is still taking place today. Other subcellular entities such as viruses, both DNA-based and RNA-based, do evolve.\n\nThere is also view that evolution is acting on epigenes.\n\nLeo Buss in his book \"The Evolution of Individuality\" proposes that much of the evolution of development in animals reflects the conflict between selective pressures acting at the level of the cell and those acting at the level of the multicellular individual. This perspective can shed new light on phenomena as diverse as gastrulation and germ line sequestration.\n\nThis selection for unconstrained proliferation is in conflict with the fitness interests of the individual, and thus there is tension between selection at the level of the cell and selection at the level of the individual. Since the proliferation of specific cells of the vertebrate immune system to fight off infecting pathogens is a case of programmed and exquisitely contained cellular proliferation, it represents a case of the individual manipulating selection at the level of the cell to enhance its own fitness. In the case of the vertebrate immune system, selection at the level of the cell and individual are not in conflict.\n\nSome view cancer stem cells as units of selection.\n\nGene–culture coevolution was developed to explain how human behavior is a product of two different and interacting evolutionary processes: genetic evolution and cultural evolution.\n\nSelection at the level of the organism can be described as Darwinism, and is well understood and considered common. If a relatively faster gazelle manages to survive and reproduce more, the causation of the higher fitness of this gazelle can be fully accounted for if one looks at how individual gazelles fare under predation.\n\nThe speed of the faster gazelle could be caused by a single gene, be polygenic, or be fully environmentally determined, but the unit of selection in this case is the individual since speed is a property of each individual gazelle.\n\nWhen speaking about individual organism evolution an extended phenotype and superorganism must be also mentioned.\n\nIf a group of organisms, owing to their interactions or division of labor, provides superior fitness compared to other groups, where the fitness of the group is higher or lower than the mean fitness of the constituent individuals, group selection can be declared to occur.\n\nSpecific syndromes of selective factors can create situations in which groups are selected because they display group properties which are selected-for. Many common examples of group traits are reducible to individual traits, however. Selection of these traits is thus more simply explained as selection of individual traits.\n\nSome mosquito-transmitted rabbit viruses are only transmitted to uninfected rabbits from infected rabbits which are still alive. This creates a selective pressure on every group of viruses already infecting a rabbit not to become too virulent and kill their host rabbit before enough mosquitoes have bitten it, since otherwise all the viruses inside the dead rabbit would rot with it. And indeed in natural systems such viruses display much lower virulence levels than do mutants of the same viruses that in laboratory culture readily outcompete non-virulent variants (or than do tick-transmitted viruses since ticks do bite dead rabbits).\n\nIn the previous passage, the group is assumed to have \"lower virulence\", i.e., \"virulence\" is presented as a group trait. One could argue then that the selection is in fact against individual viruses that are too virulent. In this case, however, the fitness of all viruses within a rabbit is affected by what the group does to the rabbit. Indeed, the proper, directly selected group property is that of \"not killing the rabbit too early\" rather than individual virulence. In situations such as these, we would expect there to be selection for cooperation amongst the viruses in a group in such a way that the group will not \"kill the rabbit too early\". It is of course true that any group behavior is the result of individual traits, such as individual viruses suppressing the virulence of their neighbours, but the causes of phenotypes are rarely the causes of fitness differences.\n\nIt remains controversial among biologists whether selection can operate at and above the level of species. One particular defender of the idea of species selection was Stephen Jay Gould who proposed the view that there exist macroevolutionary processes which shape evolution that are not driven by the microevolutionary mechanisms that are the basis of the Modern Synthesis. If one views species as entities that replicate (speciate) and die (go extinct), then species could be subject to selection and thus could change their occurrence over geological time, much as heritable selected-for traits change theirs over generations.\n\nFor evolution to be driven by species selection, differential success must be the result of selection upon species-intrinsic properties, rather than for properties of genes, cells, individuals, or populations within species. Such properties include, for example, population structure, their propensity to speciate, extinction rates, and geological persistence. While the fossil record shows differential persistence of species, examples of species-intrinsic properties subject to natural selection have been much harder to document.\n\n\n", "id": "1109200", "title": "Unit of selection"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5485600", "text": "Insular dwarfism\n\nInsular dwarfism, a form of phyletic dwarfism, is the process and condition of the reduction in size of large animals over a number of generations when their population's range is limited to a small environment, primarily islands. This natural process is distinct from the intentional creation of dwarf breeds, called dwarfing. This process has occurred many times throughout evolutionary history, with examples including dinosaurs, like \"Europasaurus\", and modern animals such as elephants and their relatives. This process, and other \"island genetics\" artifacts, can occur not only on traditional islands, but also in other situations where an ecosystem is isolated from external resources and breeding. This can include caves, desert oases, isolated valleys and isolated mountains (\"sky islands\"). Insular dwarfism is one aspect of the more general \"island rule\", which posits that when mainland animals colonize islands, small species tend to evolve larger bodies, and large species tend to evolve smaller bodies.\n\nThere are several proposed explanations for the mechanism which produces such dwarfism.\n\nOne is a selective process where only smaller animals trapped on the island survive, as food periodically declines to a borderline level. The smaller animals need fewer resources and smaller territories, and so are more likely to get past the break-point where population decline allows food sources to replenish enough for the survivors to flourish. Smaller size is also advantageous from a reproductive standpoint, as it entails shorter gestation periods and generation times.\n\nIn the tropics, small size should make thermoregulation easier.\n\nAmong herbivores, large size confers advantages in coping with both competitors and predators, so a reduction or absence of either would facilitate dwarfing; competition appears to be the more important factor.\n\nAmong carnivores, the main factor is thought to be the size and availability of prey resources, and competition is believed to be less important. In tiger snakes, insular dwarfism occurs on islands where available prey is restricted to smaller sizes than are normally taken by mainland snakes. Since prey size preference in snakes is generally proportional to body size, small snakes may be better adapted to take small prey.\n\nThe inverse process, wherein small animals breeding on isolated islands lacking the predators of large land masses may become much larger than normal, is called island gigantism. An excellent example is the dodo, the ancestors of which were normal-sized pigeons. There are also several species of giant rats, one still extant, that coexisted with both \"Homo floresiensis\" and the dwarf stegodons on Flores.\n\nThe process of insular dwarfing can occur relatively rapidly by evolutionary standards. This is in contrast to increases in maximum body size, which are much more gradual. When normalized to generation length, the maximum rate of body mass decrease during insular dwarfing was found to be over 30 times greater than the maximum rate of body mass increase for a ten-fold change in mammals. The disparity is thought to reflect the fact that pedomorphism offers a relatively easy route to evolve smaller adult body size; on the other hand, the evolution of larger maximum body size is likely to be interrupted by the emergence of a series of constraints that must be overcome by evolutionary innovations before the process can continue.\n\nFor both herbivores and carnivores, island size, the degree of island isolation and the size of the ancestral continental species appear not to be of major direct importance to the degree of dwarfing. However, when considering only the body masses of recent top herbivores and carnivores, and including data from both continental and island land masses, the body masses of the largest species in a land mass were found to scale to the size of the land mass, with slopes of about 0.5 log(body mass/kg) per log(land area/km). There were separate regression lines for endothermic top predators, ectothermic top predators, endothermic top herbivores and (on the basis of limited data) ectothermic top herbivores, such that food intake was 7 to 24-fold higher for top herbivores than for top predators, and about the same for endotherms and ectotherms of the same trophic level (this leads to ectotherms being 5 to 16 times heavier than corresponding endotherms).\n\nRecognition that insular dwarfism could apply to dinosaurs arose through the work of Ferenc Nopcsa, a Hungarian-born aristocrat, adventurer, scholar, and paleontologist. Nopcsa studied Transylvanian dinosaurs intensively, noticing that they were smaller than their cousins elsewhere in the world. For example, he unearthed six-meter-long sauropods, a group of dinosaurs which elsewhere commonly grew to 30 meters or more. Nopcsa deduced that the area where the remains were found was an island, Hațeg Island (now the Haţeg or Hatzeg basin in Romania) during the Mesozoic era. Nopcsa's proposal of dinosaur dwarfism on Hațeg Island is today widely accepted after further research confirmed that the remains found are not from juveniles.\n\nIn addition, the genus \"Balaur\" was initially described as a \"Velociraptor\"-sized dromaeosaurid (and in consequence a dubious example of insular dwarfism), but has been since reclassified as a secondarily flightless stem bird, closer to modern birds than \"Jeholornis\" (thus actually an example of insular gigantism).\n\n\n", "id": "5485600", "title": "Insular dwarfism"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5745363", "text": "Evolutionary pressure\n\nAny cause that reduces reproductive success in a portion of a population potentially exerts evolutionary pressure, selective pressure or selection pressure. With sufficient pressure, inherited traits that mitigate its effects—even if they would be deleterious in other circumstances—can become widely spread through a population. It is a quantitative description of the amount of change occurring in processes investigated by evolutionary biology, but the formal concept is often extended to other areas of research.\n\nIn population genetics, selection pressure is usually expressed as a selection coefficient.\n\nIt has been shown that putting an amino acid bio-synthesizing gene like \"HIS4\" gene under amino acid selective pressure in yeast causes enhancement of expression of adjacent genes which is due to the transcriptional co-regulation of two adjacent genes in Eukaryota.\n\nDrug resistance in bacteria is an example of an outcome of natural selection.\nWhen a drug is used on a species of bacteria, those that cannot resist die and do not produce offspring, while those that survive potentially pass on the resistance gene to the next generation (vertical gene transmission). The resistance gene can also be passed on to one bacterium by another of a different species (horizontal gene transmission). Because of this, the drug resistance increases over generations. For example, in hospitals, environments are created where pathogens such as \"C\". \"difficile\" have developed a resistance to antibiotics. Antibiotic resistance is made worse by the misuse of antibiotics. Antibiotic resistance is encouraged when antibiotics are used to treat non-bacterial diseases, and when antibiotics are not used for the prescribed amount of time or in the prescribed dose. Antibiotic resistance may arise out of standing genetic variation in a population or de novo mutations in the population. Either pathway could lead to antibiotic resistance, which may be a form of evolutionary rescue.\n\n\"Clostridium difficile\", gram-positive bacteria species that inhabits the gut of mammals, exemplifies one type of bacteria that is a major cause of death by nosocomial infections.\n\nWhen symbiotic gut flora populations are disrupted (e.g., by antibiotics), one becomes more vulnerable to pathogens. The rapid evolution of antibiotic resistance places an enormous selective pressure on the advantageous alleles of resistance passed down to future generations. The Red Queen hypothesis shows that the evolutionary arms race between pathogenic bacteria and humans is a constant battle for evolutionary advantages in outcompeting each other. The evolutionary arms race between the rapidly evolving virulence factors of the bacteria and the treatment practices of modern medicine requires evolutionary biologists to understand the mechanisms of resistance in these pathogenic bacteria, especially considering the growing number of infected hospitalized patients. The evolved virulence factors pose a threat to patients in hospitals, who are immunocompromised from illness or antibiotic treatment. Virulence factors are the characteristics that the evolved bacteria have developed to increase pathogenicity. One of the virulence factors of \"C\". \"difficile\" that largely constitutes its resistance to antibiotics is its toxins: enterotoxin TcdA and cytotoxin TcdB. Toxins produce spores that are difficult to inactivate and remove from the environment. This is especially true in hospitals where an infected patient's room may contain spores for up to 20 weeks. Combating the threat of the rapid spread of CDIs is therefore dependent on hospital sanitation practices removing spores from the environment. A study published in the \"American Journal of Gastroenterology\" found that to control the spread of CDIs glove use, hand hygiene, disposable thermometers and disinfection of the environment are necessary practices in health facilities. The virulence of this pathogen is remarkable and may take a radical change at sanitation approaches used in hospitals to control CDI outbreaks.\n\nThe Malaria parasite can exert a selective pressure on populations. This pressure has led to natural selection for erythrocytes carrying the sickle cell hemoglobin gene mutation (Hb S)—causing sickle cell anaemia—in areas where malaria is a major health concern, because the condition grants some resistance to this infectious disease.\n\nJust as with the development of antibiotic resistance in bacteria, resistance to pesticides and herbicides has begun to appear with commonly used agricultural chemicals. For example:\n\nHuman activity can lead to unintended changes in the environment. The human activity will have a possible negative effect on a certain population, causing many individuals from said population to die due to not being adapted to this new pressure. The individuals that are better adapted to this new pressure will survive and reproduce at a higher rate than those who are at a disadvantage. This occurs over may generations until the population as a whole is better adapted to the pressure. This is natural selection at work, but the pressure is coming from man-made activity such as building roads or hunting. This is seen in the below examples of cliff swallows and elk. However, not all human activity that causes an evolutionary pressure happens unintentionally. This is demonstrated in dog domestication and the subsequent selective breeding that resulted in the various breeds known today.\n\nPopulations of cliff swallows in Nebraska have displayed morphological changes in their wings after many years of living next to roads. Collecting data for over 30 years, researchers noticed a decline in wingspan of living swallow populations, while also noting a decrease in the number of cliff swallows killed by passing cars. Those cliff swallows that were killed by passing cars showed a larger wingspan than the population as a whole. Confounding effects such as road usage, car size, and population size were shown to have no impact on the study.\n\nEvolutionary pressure imposed by humans is also seen in elk populations. These studies do not look at morphological differences, but behavioral differences. Faster and more mobile male elk were shown to be more likely to fall prey to hunters. The hunters create an environment where the more active animals are more likely to succumb to predation than less active animals. Female elk who survived past two years, would decrease their activity as each year passed, leaving more shy female elk that were more likely to survive. Female elk in a separate study also showed behavioral differences, with older females displaying the timid behavior that one would expect from this selection.\n\nSince the domestication of dogs, they have evolved alongside humans due to pressure from humans and the environment. This began by humans and wolves sharing the same area, with a pressure to coexist eventually leading to their domestication. Evolutionary pressure from humans led to many different breeds that paralleled the needs of the time, whether it was a need for protecting livestock or assisting in the hunt. Hunting and herding were a couple of the first reasons for humans artificially selecting for traits they deemed beneficial. This selective breeding does not stop there, but extends to humans selecting for certain traits deemed desirable in their domesticated dogs, such as size and color, even if they are not necessarily beneficial to the human in a tangible way. An unintended consequence of this selection is that domesticated dogs also tend to have heritable diseases depending on what specific breed they encompass.\n\n", "id": "5745363", "title": "Evolutionary pressure"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6134939", "text": "Polyploid complex\n\nA polyploid complex, also called a diploid-polyploid complex, is a group of interrelated and interbreeding species that also have differing levels of ploidy that can allow interbreeding.\n\nA polyploid complex was described by E. B. Babcock and G. Ledyard Stebbins in their 1938 monograph \"The American Species of \"Crepis\": their interrelationships and distribution as affected by polyploidy and apomixis\". In \"Crepis\" and some other perennial plant species, a polyploid complex may arise where there are at least two genetically isolated diploid populations, in addition to auto- and allopolyploid derivatives that coexist and interbreed. Thus a complex network of interrelated forms may exist where the polyploid forms allow for intermediate forms between the diploid species that are otherwise unable to interbreed.\n\nThis complex situation does not fit well within the biological species concept of Ernst Mayr which defines a species as \"groups of actually or potentially interbreeding natural populations which are reproductively isolated from other such groups\".\n\nIn many diploid-polyploid complexes the polyploid hybrid members reproduce asexually while diploids reproduce sexually. Thus polyploidy is related to the phenomenon called \"geographic parthenogenesis\" by zoologist Albert Vandel, that asexual organisms often have greater geographic ranges than their sexual relatives. It is not known which of the associated factors is the major determiner of geographic parthenogenesis, hybridization, polyploidy, or asexual reproduction.\n\n", "id": "6134939", "title": "Polyploid complex"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4543658", "text": "Mosaic evolution\n\nMosaic evolution (or modular evolution) is the concept that evolutionary change takes place in some body parts or systems without simultaneous changes in other parts. Another definition is the \"evolution of characters at various rates both within and between species\". Its place in evolutionary theory comes under long-term trends or macroevolution.\n\nBy its very nature, the evidence for this idea comes mainly from palaeontology. It is not claimed that this pattern is universal, but there is now a wide range of examples from many different taxa. Some examples:\n\nIn the neodarwinist theory of evolution, as postulated by Stephen Jay Gould, there is room for differing development, when a life form matures earlier or later, in shape and size. This is due to allomorphism. Organs develop at differing rhythms, as a creature grows and matures. Thus a \"heterochronic clock\" has three variants: 1) time, as a straight line; 2) general size, as a curved line; 3) shape, as another curved line.\n\nWhen a creature is advanced in size, it may develop at a smaller size; alternatively, it may maintain its original size or, if delayed, it may result in a larger sized creature. That is insufficient to understand heterochronic mechanism.\nSize must be combined with shape, so a creature may retain paedomorphic features if advanced in shape or present recapitulatory appearance when retarded in shape. These names are not very indicative, as past theories of development were very confusing.\n\nA creature in its ontogeny may combine heterochronic features in six vectors, although Gould considers that there is some binding with growth and sexual maturation. A creature may, for example, present some neotenic features and retarded development, resulting in new features derived from an original creature only by regulatory genes. Most novel human features (compared to closely related apes) were of this nature, not implying major change in structural genes, as was classically considered.\n\n", "id": "4543658", "title": "Mosaic evolution"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1322877", "text": "Chronospecies\n\nA chronospecies is a species derived from a sequential development pattern which involves continual and uniform changes from an extinct ancestral form on an evolutionary scale. This sequence of alterations eventually produces a population which is physically, morphologically, and/or genetically distinct from the original ancestors. Throughout this change, there is only one species in the lineage at any point in time, as opposed to cases where divergent evolution produces contemporary species with a common ancestor. The related term paleospecies (or palaeospecies) indicates an extinct species only identified with fossil material. This identification relies on distinct similarities between the earlier fossil specimens and some proposed descendant, although the exact relationship to the later species is not always defined. In particular, the range of variation within all the early fossil specimens does not exceed the observed range which exists in the later species.\n\nA paleosubspecies (or palaeosubspecies) identifies an extinct subspecies which evolved into the currently existing form. This connection with relatively recent variations, usually from the Late Pleistocene, often relies on the additional information available in subfossil material. Most of the current species have changed in size adapting to the climatic changes during the last ice age (\"see\" Bergmann's Rule).\n\nThe further identification of fossil specimens as part of a \"chronospecies\" relies on additional similarities which more strongly indicate a specific relationship with a known species. For example, relatively recent specimens – hundreds of thousands to a few million years old – with consistent variations (e.g. always smaller but with the same proportions) as a living species might represent the final step in a chronospecies. This possible identification of the immediate ancestor of the living taxon may also rely on stratigraphic information to establish the age of the specimens.\n\nThe concept of chronospecies is related to the phyletic gradualism model of evolution, and also relies on an extensive fossil record, since morphological changes accumulate over time and two very different organisms could be connected by a series of intermediaries.\n\n\n", "id": "1322877", "title": "Chronospecies"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4726991", "text": "Pharyngula\n\nThe pharyngula is a stage in the embryonic development of vertebrates. At this stage, the embryos of all vertebrates are similar, having developed features typical of vertebrates, such as the beginning of a spinal cord. Named by William Ballard, the pharyngula stage follows the blastula, gastrula and neurula stages.\n\nAt the pharyngula stage, all vertebrate embryos show remarkable similarities, i.e., it is a \"phylotypic stage\" of the sub-phylum, containing the following features:\n\nThe branchial grooves are matched on the inside by a series of paired gill pouches. In fish, the pouches and grooves eventually meet and form the gill slits, which allow water to pass from the pharynx over the gills and out the body.\n\nIn the other vertebrates, the grooves and pouches disappear. In humans, the chief trace of their existence is the eustachian tube and auditory canal which (interrupted only by the eardrum) connect the pharynx with the outside of the head.\n\nThe existence of a common pharyngula stage for vertebrates was first proposed by German biologist Ernst Haeckel (1834–1919) in 1874.\n\nThe observation of the conservation of animal morphology during the embryonic phylotypic period, where there is maximal similarity between the species within each animal phylum, has led to the proposition that embryogenesis diverges more extensively in the early and late stages than the middle stage, and is known as the hourglass model. Comparative genomic studies suggest that the phylotypic stage is the maximally conserved stage during embryogenesis.\n\n", "id": "4726991", "title": "Pharyngula"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=410010", "text": "Arctometatarsal\n\nAn arctometatarsalian organism is one in which the proximal part of the middle metatarsal is pinched between the surrounding metatarsals. The trait appears to be highly homoplastic, common in certain sorts of dinosaurs accustomed to running (among them the tyrannosauroids, ornithomimosaurs, and troodontids), to evenly transmit force to the metatarsals.\n", "id": "410010", "title": "Arctometatarsal"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23558", "text": "Pangenesis\n\nPangenesis was Charles Darwin's hypothetical mechanism for heredity. He presented this 'provisional hypothesis' in his 1868 work \"The Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication\" and felt that it brought 'together a multitude of facts which are at present left disconnected by any efficient cause'. The etymology of the word comes from the Greek words \"pan\" (a prefix meaning \"whole\", \"encompassing\") and \"genesis\" (\"birth\") or \"genos\" (\"origin\"). The hypothesis was eventually replaced by Mendel's laws of inheritance.\n\nThe pangenesis theory, similar to Hippocrates's views on the topic, imply that the whole of parental organisms participate in heredity (thus the prefix \"pan\") while adapting to cell theory. Much of Darwin's model was speculatively based on inheritance of tiny heredity particles he called gemmules that could be transmitted from parent to offspring. Darwin emphasized that only cells could regenerate new tissues or generate new organisms. He posited that atomic sized gemmules formed by cells would diffuse and aggregate in the reproductive organs.\n\nThe hypothesis of pangenesis was developed by the ancient Greek philosophers such as Hippocrates and Democritus. Darwin wrote that Hippocrates' pangenesis was \"almost identical with mine—merely a change of terms—and an application of them to classes of facts necessarily unknown to the old philosopher.\"\n\nHistorian of science Conway Zirkle has noted:\n\nThe hypothesis of pangenesis is as old as the belief in the inheritance of acquired characters. It was endorsed by Hippocrates, Democritus, Galen (?), Clement of Alexandria, Lactantius, St. Isidore of Seville, Bartholomeus Anglicus, St. Albert the Great, St. Thomas of Aquinas, Peter of Crescentius (?), Paracelsus, Jerome Cardan, Levinus Lemnius, Venette, John Ray, Buffon, Bonnet, Maupertius, von Haller and Herbert Spencer.\n\nA very similar hypothesis to Darwin's pangenesis was held by the French naturalist Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon who developed a system of heredity. Commenting on Buffon's views, Darwin stated, \"If Buffon had assumed that his organic molecules had been formed by each separate unit throughout the body, his view and mine would have been very closely similar.\"\n\nIn 1801, Erasmus Darwin advocated a hypothesis of pangenesis in the third edition of his book \"Zoonomia\".\n\nThe Irish physician Henry Freke in his book \"Origin of Species by Means of Organic Affinity\" (1861) developed a variant of pangenesis.\n\nIn 1864, Herbert Spencer in his book \"Principles of Biology\", proposed a theory of \"physiological units\". These hypothetical hereditary units were similar to Darwin's gemmules.\n\nDarwin's pangenesis theory was complex as he tried to explain the process of sexual reproduction, passing of traits and complex developmental phenomena, such as cellular regeneration.\n\nSome gemmules remained dormant for generations, whereas others were routinely carried by all offspring. He thought about these literally, \"almost as if gemmules were letters in the postal system\". Every child was built up from a mixture of the parents and grandparents' gemmules coming from either side. Darwin likened this to gardening: a flowerbed could be sprinkled with seeds \"most of which soon germinate, some lie for a period dormant, whilst others perish.\". He did not claim gemmules were in the blood, although his theory was often interpreted in this way. Responding to Fleming Jenkin's review of \"On the Origin of Species\", he argued that pangenesis would permit the preservation of some favourable variations in a population so that they wouldn't die out through blending.\n\nHugo de Vries characterized the theory in two propositions, of which he only accepted the first:\n\nDarwin's pangenesis theory was criticised for its Lamarckian premise that parents could pass on traits acquired in their lifetime. Lamarckism fell from favour after August Weismann's research in the 1880s indicated that changes from use (such as lifting weights to increase muscle mass) and disuse (such as being lazy and becoming scrawny) were not heritable. Some Lamarckian principles, however, have not been entirely discounted and some of Darwin's pangenesis principles (in this regard) do relate to heritable aspects of phenotypic plasticity, while the status of gemmules has been firmly rejected. Darwin himself had noted that \"the existence of free gemmules is a gratuitous assumption\"; by some accounts in modern interpretation, gemmules may be considered a prescient mix of DNA, RNA, proteins, prions, and other mobile elements that are heritable in a non-Mendelian manner at the molecular level.\n\nDarwin's half-cousin Francis Galton conducted wide-ranging inquiries into heredity which led him to refute Charles Darwin's hypothetical theory of pangenesis. In consultation with Darwin, he set out to see if gemmules were transported in the blood. In a long series of experiments in 1869 to 1871, he transfused the blood between dissimilar breeds of rabbits, and examined the features of their offspring. He found no evidence of characters transmitted in the transfused blood.\n\nDarwin challenged the validity of Galton's experiment, giving his reasons in an article published in 'Nature' where he wrote: \"Now, in the chapter on Pangenesis in my \"Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,\" I have not said one word about the blood, or about any fluid proper to any circulating system. It is, indeed, obvious that the presence of gemmules in the blood can form no necessary part of my hypothesis; for I refer in illustration of it to the lowest animals, such as the Protozoa, which do not possess blood or any vessels; and I refer to plants in which the fluid, when present in the vessels, cannot be considered as true blood.\" He goes on to admit: \"Nevertheless, when I first heard of Mr. Galton's experiments, I did not sufficiently reflect on the subject, and saw not the difficulty of believing in the presence of gemmules in the blood.\"\n\n\n\n", "id": "23558", "title": "Pangenesis"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7335684", "text": "Spandrel (biology)\n\nIn evolutionary biology, a spandrel is a phenotypic characteristic that is a byproduct of the evolution of some other characteristic, rather than a direct product of adaptive selection.\n\nThe term \"spandrel\" originated as an architectural word for the roughly triangular space between the tops of two adjacent arches and the ceiling. These spaces were not actually utilized until later on, when artists realized they could make designs and paint in these small areas, enhancing the overall design of the building.\n\nStephen Jay Gould and Richard Lewontin brought the term into biology in their influential 1979 paper \"The Spandrels of San Marco and the Panglossian Paradigm: A Critique of the Adaptationist Programme\". This defined the biological concept and argued the case for a structuralist view of evolution.\n\nThe term was coined by Harvard paleontologist Stephen Jay Gould and population geneticist Richard Lewontin in their paper \"The Spandrels of San Marco and the Panglossian Paradigm: A Critique of the Adaptationist Programme\" (1979). The evolutionary biologist Günter P. Wagner called the paper \"the most influential structuralist manifesto\".\n\nIn their paper, Gould and Lewontin employed the analogy of spandrels in Renaissance architecture: curved areas of masonry between arches supporting a dome that arise as a consequence of decisions about the shape of the arches and the base of the dome, rather than being designed for the artistic purposes for which they were often employed. The authors singled out properties like the necessary number of four and their specific three-dimensional shape. At the time, it was thought in the scientific community that everything an animal has developed that has a positive effect on that animal's fitness was due to natural selection or some adaptation. Gould and Lewontin proposed an alternative hypothesis: that due to adaptation and natural selection, byproducts are also formed. These byproducts of adaptations that had no real relative advantage to survival, they termed spandrels. In the biological sense, a \"spandrel\" might result from an architectural requirement inherent in the \"Bauplan\" of an organism, or from some other constraint on adaptive evolution.\n\nEvolutionary biology uses the term spandrel for features of an organism arising as byproducts, rather than adaptations, that have no clear benefit for the organism's fitness and survival. In response to the position that spandrels are just small, unimportant byproducts, Gould and Lewontin argue that \"we must not recognize that small means unimportant. Spandrels can be as prominent as primary adaptations\". A main example used by Gould and Lewontin is the human brain. Many secondary processes and actions come in addition to the main functions of the human brain. These secondary processes and thoughts can eventually turn into an adaptation or provide a fitness advantage to humans. Just because something is a secondary trait or byproduct of an adaptation does not mean it has no use.\n\nIn 1982, Gould and Vrba introduced the term \"exaptation\" for characteristics that enhance fitness in their present role but were not built for that role by natural selection. Exaptations may be divided into two subcategories: pre-adaptations and spandrels. Spandrels are characteristics that did not originate by the direct action of natural selection and that were later co-opted for a current use. Gould saw the term to be optimally suited for evolutionary biology for \"the concept of a nonadaptive architectural by-product of definite and necessary form – a structure of particular size and shape that then becomes available for later and secondary utility\".\n\nGould and Lewontin's suggestive proposal generated a large literature of critique, which Gould characterised as being grounded in two ways. First, a terminological claim was offered that the \"spandrels\" of Basilica di San Marco were not spandrels at all, but rather were pendentives. Gould responded, \"The term spandrel may be extended from its particular architectural use for two-dimensional byproducts to the generality of 'spaces left over', a definition that properly includes the San Marco pendentives.\"\n\nOther critics, such as Daniel Dennett, further claimed (in \"Darwin's Dangerous Idea\" and elsewhere) that these pendentives are not merely architectural by-products as Gould and Lewontin supposed. Dennett argues that alternatives to pendentives, such as corbels or squinches, would have served equally well from an architectural standpoint, but pendentives were deliberately selected due to their aesthetic value. Critics such as H. Allen Orr argued that Lewontin and Gould's oversight in this regard illustrates their underestimation of the pervasiveness of adaptations found in nature.\n\nIan Kluge criticizes the whole subject of spandrels to be bogged down in a definitional debate. He argues it is not entirely clear what is and is not a spandrel. He also argues all examples of spandrels, pendentives, corbels and squinches do actually serve a function; they are necessary to achieve something, but that necessity is exactly what epiphenomenalism denies.\n\nGould responded that critics ignore that \"later\" selective value is a separate issue from \"origination\" as necessary consequences of structure; he summarised his use of the term 'spandrel' in 1997: \"Evolutionary biology needs such an explicit term for features arising as byproducts, rather than adaptations, whatever their subsequent exaptive utility... Causes of historical origin must always be separated from current utilities; their conflation has seriously hampered the evolutionary analysis of form in the history of life.\" Gould cites the masculinized genitalia of female hyenas and the brooding chamber of some snails as examples of evolutionary spandrels.\n\nGould (1991) outlines some considerations for grounds for assigning or denying a structure the status of spandrel, pointing first to the fact that a structure originating as a spandrel through primary exaptation may have been further crafted for its current utility by a suite of secondary adaptations, thus the grounds of how well crafted a structure is for a function cannot be used as grounds for assigning or denying spandrel status. The nature of the current utility of a structure also does not provide a basis for assigning or denying spandrel status, nor does he see the origin of a structure as having any relationship to the extent or vitality of a later co-opted role, but places importance on the later evolutionary meaning of a structure. This seems to imply that the design and secondary utilization of spandrels may feed back into the evolutionary process and thus determine major features of the entire structure. The grounds Gould does accept to have validity in assigning or denying a structure the status of spandrel are historical order and comparative anatomy. Historical order involves the use of historical evidence to determine which feature arose as a primary adaptation and which one appeared subsequently as a co-opted by-product. In the absence of historical evidence, inferences are drawn about the evolution of a structure through comparative anatomy. Evidence is obtained by comparing current examples of the structure in a cladistic context and by subsequently trying to determine a historical order from the distribution yielded by tabulation.\n\nLinguist Noam Chomsky has argued that the \"language faculty\", and the property of discrete infinity or recursion that plays a central role in his theory of universal grammar (UG), may have evolved as a spandrel. In this view, Chomsky initially pointed to language being a result of increased brain size and increasing complexity, though he provides no definitive answers as to what factors led to the brain attaining the size and complexity of which discrete infinity is a consequence. Steven Pinker and Ray Jackendoff say Chomsky's case is \"unconvincing\" and that \"language maps \"among\" recursive systems rather than being a straightforward externalization of a single recursive system\", and as an example, numerical recursion \"is parasitic on language (rather than vice versa)\" among other arguments. Pinker contends that the language faculty is not a spandrel, but rather a result of natural selection. Newmeyer (1998) instead views the lack of symmetry, irregularity and idiosyncrasy that universal grammar tolerates and the widely different principles of organization of its various sub-components and consequent wide variety of linking rules relating them as evidence that such design features do not qualify as an exaptation. He suggests that universal grammar cannot be derivative and autonomous at the same time, and that Chomsky wants language to be an epiphenomenon and an \"organ\" simultaneously, where an organ is defined as a product of a dedicated genetic blueprint. Rudolph Botha counters that Chomsky has offered his conception of the feature of recursion but not a theory of the evolution of the language faculty as a whole.\n\nPinker has described music as a spandrel to the enlarged brain. Dunbar found this conclusion odd, and stated that \"it falls foul of what we might refer to as the Spandrel Fallacy: 'I haven't really had time to determine empirically whether or not something has a function, so I'll conclude that it can't possibly have one. Dunbar states that there are two potential roles of music in evolution: \"One is its role in mating and mate choice, the other is its role in social bonding.\"\n\n\n", "id": "7335684", "title": "Spandrel (biology)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7538436", "text": "Microbial population biology\n\nMicrobial population biology is the application of the principles of population biology to microorganisms.\n\nMicrobial population biology, in practice, is the application of population ecology and population genetics toward understanding the ecology and evolution of bacteria, archaebacteria, microscopic fungi (such as yeasts), additional microscopic eukaryotes (e.g., \"protozoa\" and algae), and viruses.\n\nMicrobial population biology also encompasses the evolution and ecology of community interactions (community ecology) between microorganisms, including microbial coevolution and predator-prey interactions. In addition, microbial population biology considers microbial interactions with more macroscopic organisms (e.g., host-parasite interactions), though strictly this should be more from the perspective of the microscopic rather than the macroscopic organism. A good deal of microbial population biology may be described also as microbial evolutionary ecology. On the other hand, typically microbial population biologists (unlike microbial ecologists) are less concerned with questions of the role of microorganisms in ecosystem ecology, which is the study of nutrient cycling and energy movement between biotic as well as abiotic components of ecosystems.\n\nMicrobial population biology can include aspects of molecular evolution or phylogenetics. Strictly, however, these emphases should be employed toward understanding issues of microbial evolution and ecology rather than as a means of understanding more universal truths applicable to both microscopic and macroscopic organisms. The microorganisms in such endeavors consequently should be recognized as organisms rather than simply as molecular or evolutionary reductionist model systems. Thus, the study of RNA \"in vitro\" evolution is not microbial population biology and nor is the \"in silico\" generation of phylogenies of otherwise non-microbial sequences, even if aspects of either may in some (especially unintentional) manner be analogous to evolution in actual microbial populations.\n\nMicrobial population biology can (and often does) involve the testing of more-general ecological and evolutionary hypotheses. Again, it is important to retain some emphasis on the microbe since at some point this \"question-driven\" microbial population biology becomes instead population biology using microorganisms. Because the point of departure of these potentially disparate emphases can be somewhat arbitrary, there exist vague and not universally accepted delimits around what the discipline of microbial population biology does and does not constitute.\n\nA Microbial Population Biology Gordon Research Conference is held every odd year, to date in New England (and usually in New Hampshire). The 2007 conference web page introduces the meetings as:\nMicrobial Population Biology covers a diverse range of cutting edge issues in the microbial sciences and beyond. Firmly founded in evolutionary biology and with a strongly integrative approach, past meetings have covered topics ranging from the dynamics and genetics of adaptation to the evolution of mutation rate, community ecology, evolutionary genomics, altruism, and epidemiology.\nThis meeting is never dull: some of the most significant and contentious issues in biology have been thrashed out here.\nA history of the meeting can be found here.\n\nThe next Microbial Population Biology Gordon conference is scheduled for 2011. Information on past (and future) meetings is summarized as follows:\n\n\n", "id": "7538436", "title": "Microbial population biology"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6692007", "text": "Largest-scale trends in evolution\n\nThe history of life on Earth seems to show a clear trend; for example, it seems intuitive that there is a trend towards increasing complexity in living organisms. More recently evolved organisms, such as mammals, appear to be much more complex than organisms, such as bacteria, which have existed for a much longer period of time. However, there are theoretical and empirical problems with this claim. From a theoretical perspective, it appears that there is no reason to expect evolution to result in any largest-scale trends, although small-scale trends, limited in time and space, are expected (Gould, 1997). From an empirical perspective, it is difficult to measure complexity and, when it has been measured, the evidence does not support a largest-scale trend (McShea, 1996).\n\nMany of the founding figures of evolution supported the idea of \"Evolutionary progress\" which has fallen from favour, but the work of Francisco J. Ayala and Michael Ruse suggests is still influential.\n\nMcShea (1998) discusses eight features of organisms that might indicate largest-scale trends in evolution entropy, energy intensiveness, evolutionary versatility, developmental depth, structural depth, adaptedness, size, complexity. He calls these \"live hypotheses\", meaning that trends in these features are currently being considered by evolutionary biologists. McShea observes that the most popular hypothesis, among scientists, is that there is a largest-scale trend towards increasing complexity.\n\nEvolutionary theorists agree that there are local trends in evolution, such as increasing brain size in hominids, but these directional changes do not persist indefinitely, and trends in opposite directions also occur (Gould, 1997). Evolution causes organisms to adapt to their local environment; when the environment changes, the direction of the trend may change. The question of whether there is evolutionary progress is better formulated as the question of whether there are any largest-scale trends in evolution (McShea, 1998). That is, is there a consistent directional change throughout the history of life on Earth?\n\nOrganisms adapt to their local environment. As long as the local environment is stable, we can expect to observe small-scale trends, as organisms become increasingly adapted to the local environment. Gould (1997) argues that there are no global (largest-scale) trends in evolution, because traits that are advantageous for some local environment are detrimental for some other local environment.\n\nAlthough it is difficult to measure complexity, it seems uncontroversial that mammals are more complex than bacteria. Gould (1997) agrees, but claims that this apparent largest-scale trend is a statistical artifact. Bacteria represent a minimum level of complexity for life on Earth today. Gould (1997) argues that there is no selective pressure for higher levels of complexity, but there is selective pressure against complexity below the level of bacteria. This minimum required level of complexity, combined with random mutation, implies that the average level of complexity of life must increase over time. Gould (1997) uses the analogy of a random walk that begins near a wall. Although the walk is random, the walker cannot pass through the wall, so we should expect the walker to move increasingly further from the wall as time passes. This does not imply that the walker is driven away from the wall. The wall is analogous to the complexity level of bacteria. We should expect evolution to wander increasingly further from this level of complexity, but it does not imply that evolution is driven towards increasing complexity.\n\nIn response to Gould's (1997) critique, Turney (2000) presents a computational model in which there is a largest-scale trend towards increasing evolutionary versatility. This trend requires continual change. Although this model shows that largest-scale trends are compatible with evolutionary theory, the model has not yet been empirically confirmed.\n\nEvolutionary theory might not predict largest-scale trends, but there may be such trends nonetheless. McShea (1996) looks at the empirical evidence for a trend towards increasing complexity in Metazoan fossils. He concludes that the evidence is not decisive and further investigation is required.\n\n\n", "id": "6692007", "title": "Largest-scale trends in evolution"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5339782", "text": "Digital ecology\n\nIn evolutionary biology digital ecology is a current of thought that posits the fusion or union of the virtual (digital information) and the real (basic life forms). It suggests that all life forms are networks. An important writer in this field was Lynn Margulis, with the speculations on her work made by the cultural historian William Irwin Thompson.\n\nIn the early stages of development, simple cells act in a random chaotic way and there is no creative development because the individualistic behaviors cancel out each other. At some point, perhaps by accident, the cells fall into an entrainment or union that networks or yokes their behaviors into some common purpose. A bunch of cells may suddenly find that they are all pointing in the same direction. Then the whole group (herd, gaggle) is propelled through space creating the function of directed (non-chaotic) motion which may be very important for locating new food sources or getting away from enemies.\n\nOnce a function is established by evolutionary advantage it becomes firm and will be included and built upon in future developments creating an endless process of transcending and including. As these functions are networked into increasingly complex and coordinated behaviors, life forms emerge and maintain vitality so long as they can \"hold it together.\" What we refer to as \"death\" is simply the loss of union. To be \"alive\" means that there is a functioning network of information and behaviors.\n\nAt first there is much chaos and randomness of individual behaviors. Then the individual comes to see advantages in networking - often it can be little more than the search for friends by isolated and alone people - communities and functions are born. In this context, creative intelligence can be defined as the ability to interact. The advantage will fall to those whose ability to adapt to and evolve with changing conditions is greatest. The new paradigm of the information age simply gives higher priority to networking and process than to ownership and property.\n\nThe maintenance of established forms (property) is essential as a tool but, as is the case for a wise carpenter, it is important to know when \"not\" to use the hammer. The maintenance and defense of established forms may be so energy depleting that the advantage lies with those who can move unencumbered into the flow. This is the game plan of the free culture, open source, creative commons crowd. But it is not an either-or situation. It is, rather, a shift of emphasis and attention away from possessiveness toward creativity. The activist of the information age is simply placing faith in an evolving creative intelligence that can be made firm in a network.\n\nA notion of future interconnection environment was described as follows: \"An Eco-Grid is an open worldwide interconnection environment reflecting the characteristics of natural ecological environments. Its versatile resources and social roles coexist harmoniously yet evolve, provide appropriate on-demand services to one another, are transformed from one form to another, and communicate in terms of information, knowledge, and service flows through social and economic value chains. It maintains a reasonable rate of expansion of useful resources and assimilates waste resources in light of overall environment capacity.\" [ Zhuge, H. and Shi, X. Toward the Eco-grid: A Harmoniously Evolved Interconnection Environment. \"Communications of the ACM\", 47(9)(2004)78-83].\n\nThe notion of digital ecology is extended to the Cyber-Physical-Socio Ecology. [Shi, X. and Zhuge, H. Cyber-Physical-Socio Ecology, \"Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience\", 23(9)(2011)972-984.]\n\n\n", "id": "5339782", "title": "Digital ecology"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6746866", "text": "Evolutionary suicide\n\nEvolutionary suicide is an evolutionary phenomenon in which the process of adaptation causes the population to become extinct. For example, individuals might be selected to switch from eating mature plants to seedlings, and thereby deplete their food plant's population. Selection on individuals can theoretically produce adaptations that threaten the survival of the population.\n\nMuch of the research on evolutionary suicide has used the mathematical modeling technique adaptive dynamics, in which genetic changes are studied together with population dynamics. This allows the model to predict how population density will change as a given trait invades the population.\n\nEvolutionary suicide has also been referred to as \"Darwinian extinction\", \"runaway selection to self-extinction\", and \"evolutionary collapse\". The idea is similar in concept to the tragedy of the commons and the Tendency of the rate of profit to fall, namely that they are all examples of an accumulation of individual changes leading to a collective disaster such that it negates those individual changes.\n\nMany adaptations have apparently negative effects on population dynamics, for example infanticide by male lions, or the production of toxins by bacteria. However, empirically establishing that an extinction event was unambiguously caused by the process of adaptation is not a trivial task.\n\n\n", "id": "6746866", "title": "Evolutionary suicide"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2988185", "text": "Philopatry\n\nPhilopatry is the tendency of an organism to stay in or habitually return to a particular area. The causes of philopatry are numerous, but natal philopatry, where animals return to their birthplace to breed, may be the most common. The term derives from the Greek 'home-loving', although in recent years the term has been applied to more than just the animal's birthplace. Recent usage refers to animals returning to the same area to breed despite not being born there, and migratory species that demonstrate site fidelity: reusing stopovers, staging points, and wintering grounds. Some of the known reasons for organisms to be philopatric would be for mating (reproduction), survival, migration, parental care, resources, etc.. In most species of animals, individuals will benefit from living in groups, because depending on the species, individuals are more vulnerable to predation and more likely to have difficulty finding resources and food. Therefore, living in groups increases a species chances of survival, which correlates to finding resources and reproducing. Again, depending on the species, returning to their birthplace where that particular species occupies that territory is the more favorable option. The birthplaces for these animals serve as a territory for them to return for feeding and refuge, like fish from a coral reef. In an animal behavior study conducted by Paul Greenwood, overall female mammals are more likely to be philopatric, while male mammals are more likely to disperse. Male Birds are more likely to philopatric, while females are more likely to disperse. Philopatry will favor the evolution of cooperative traits because the direction of sex has consequences from the particular mating system.\n\nOne type of philopatry is \"breeding philopatry\", or \"breeding-site fidelity\", and involves an individual, pair, or colony returning to the same location to breed, year after year. Among animals that are largely sedentary, breeding-site philopatry is common. It is advantageous to reuse a breeding site, as there may be territorial competition outside of the individual’s home range, and since the area evidently meets the requirements of breeding. Such advantages are compounded among species that invest heavily in the construction of a nest or associated courtship area. For example, the megapodes (large, ground-dwelling birds such as the Australian malleefowl, \"Leipoa ocellata\") construct a large mound of vegetation and soil or sand to lay their eggs in. Megapodes often reuse the same mound for many years, only abandoning it when it is damaged beyond repair, or due to disturbance. Nest fidelity is highly beneficial as reproducing is time and energy consuming (malleefowl will tend a mound for five to six months per year). In colonial seabirds, it has been shown that nest fidelity depends on multi-scale information, including the breeding success of the focal breeding pair, the average breeding success of the rest of the colony, and the interaction of these two scales.\n\nBreeding fidelity is also well documented among species that migrate or disperse after reaching maturity. Birds, in particular, that disperse as fledglings will take advantage of exceptional navigational skills to return to a previous site. Philopatric individuals exhibit learning behaviour, and do not return to a location in following years if a breeding attempt is unsuccessful. The evolutionary benefits of such learning are evident: individuals that risk searching for a better site will not have lower fitness than those that persist with a poor site. Philopatry is not homogenous within a species, with individuals far more likely to exhibit philopatry if the breeding habitat is isolated. Similarly, non-migratory populations are more likely to be philopatric that those that migrate.\n\nIn species that exhibit lifelong monogamous pair bonds, even outside of the breeding season, there is no bias in the sex that is philopatric. However, among polygynous species that disperse (including those that find only a single mate per breeding season), there is a much higher rate of breeding-site philopatry in males than females among birds, and the opposite bias among mammals. Many possible explanations for this sex bias have been posited, with the earliest accepted hypothesis attributing the bias to intrasexual competition, and territory choice. The most widely accepted hypothesis is that proposed by Greenwood (1980). Among birds, males invest highly in protecting resources – a territory – against other males. Over consecutive seasons, a male that returns to the same territory has higher fitness than one that is not philopatric. Females are free to disperse, and assess males. Conversely, in mammals, the predominant mating system is one of matrilineal social organisation.\n\nMales generally invest little in the raising of offspring, and compete with each other for mates rather than resources. Thus dispersing can result in reproductive enhancement, as greater access to females is available. On the other hand, the cost of dispersal to females is high, and thus they are philopatric. This hypothesis also applies to natal philopatry, but is primarily concerned with breeding-site fidelity. A more recent hypothesis builds on Greenwood’s findings, suggesting that parental influence may play a large role. Because birds lay eggs, adult females are at risk of being cuckolded by their daughters, and thus would drive them out. On the other hand, young male mammals pose a threat to their dominant father, and so are driven to disperse while young.\n\n\"This page discusses the evolutionary reasons for philopatry. For the mechanisms of philopatry, see Natal homing\"\n\n\"Natal philopatry\" commonly refers to the return to the area the animal was born in, or to animals remaining in their natal territory. It is a form of breeding-site philopatry. The debate over the evolutionary causes remains unsettled. The outcomes of natal philopatry may be speciation, and, in cases of non-dispersing animals, cooperative breeding. Natal philopatry is the most common form of philopatry in females because it decreases competition for mating and increases the rate of reproduction and a higher survival rate for offspring. Natal philopatry also leads to a kin-structured population, which is when the population is more genetically related than less related between individuals in a species. This can also lead to inbreeding and a higher rate of natural and sexual selection within a population.\n\nThe exact causes for the evolution of natal philopatry are unknown. Two major hypotheses have been proposed. Shields (1982) suggested that philopatry was a way of ensuring inbreeding, in a hypothesis known as the optimal-inbreeding hypothesis. He argued that, since philopatry leads to the concentration of related individuals in their birth areas, and thus reduced genetic diversity, there must be some advantage to inbreeding – otherwise the process would have been evolutionary detrimental and would not be so prevalent. The major beneficial outcome under this hypothesis is the protection of a local gene complex that is finely adapted to the local environment. Another proposed benefit is the reduction the cost of meiosis and recombination events. Under this hypothesis, non-philopatric individuals would be maladapted and over multi-generational time, philopatry within a species could become fixed. Evidence for the optimal-inbreeding hypothesis is found in outbreeding depression. Outbreeding depression involves reduced fitness as a result of random mating, which occurs due to the breakdown of coadapted gene complexes by combining allele that do not cross well with those from a different subpopulation. However, it is important to note that outbreeding depression becomes more detrimental the longer (temporally) that subpopulations have been separated, and that this does hypothesis does not provide an initial mechanism for the evolution of natal philopatry.\n\nA second hypothesis explains the evolution of natal philopatry as a method of reducing the high costs of dispersal among offspring. A review of records of natal philopatry among passerine birds found that migrant species showed significantly less site fidelity than sedentary birds. Among migratory species, the cost of dispersal is paid either way. If the optimal-inbreeding hypothesis was correct, the benefits of inbreeding should result in philopatry among all species. Inbreeding depression is a phenomenon whereby deleterious alleles become fixed more easily within an inbreeding population. Inbreeding depression is demonstrably costly and accepted by most scientists as a greater cost than those of outbreeding depression. Within a species, there has also been found to be variation in rates of philopatry, with migratory populations exhibiting low levels of philopatry – further suggesting that the ecological cost of dispersal, rather than genetic benefits of either inbreeding or outbreeding, is the driver of natal philopatry.\n\nA number of other hypotheses exist. One such is that philopatry is a method, in migratory species, of ensuring that the sexes interact in breeding areas, and that breeding actually occurs. A second is that philopatry provides a much higher chance of breeding success. Strict habitat requirements – whether due to a precisely adapted genome or not – mean that individuals that return to a site are more familiar with it, and may have more success in either defending it, or locating mates. This hypothesis does not justify whether philopatry is due to an innate behaviour in each individual, or to learning; however it has been shown that, in most species, older individuals show higher site fidelity. Neither of these hypotheses is as widely accepted as the optimal-inbreeding or dispersal hypotheses, but their existence indicates that the evolutionary causes of natal philopatry have still not been conclusively demonstrated.\n\nA major outcome of multi-generational natal philopatry is genetic divergence and, ultimately, speciation. Without genetic exchange, geographically and reproductively isolated populations may undergo genetic drift. Such speciation is most evident on islands. For mobile island-breeding animals, finding a new breeding location may be beyond their means. In combination with a small population, as may occur due to recent colonisation, or simply restricted space, genetic drift can occur on shorter timescales than is observable in mainland species. The high levels of endemism on islands have been attributed to these factors.\n\nSubstantial evidence for speciation due to natal philopatry has been gathered in studies of island-nesting albatross. Genetic difference is most often detected in microsatellites in mitochondrial DNA. Animals that spend much of their time at sea, but which return to land to breed exhibit high levels of natal philopatry and subsequent genetic drift between populations. Many species of albatross do not breed until 6–16 years of age. Between leaving their birth island, and their return, they fly hundreds of thousands of kilometres. High levels of natal philopatry have been demonstrated via mark-recapture data. For example, more than 99% of Laysan albatross (\"Phoebastria immutabilis\") in a study returned to exactly the same nest in consecutive years. Such site-specificity can lead to speciation, and has also been observed in the earliest stages of this process. The shy albatross (\"Thalassarche [cauta] cauta\") was shown to have genetic differences in its microsatellites between three breeding colonies located off the coast of Tasmania. The differences are not currently sufficient to propose identifying the populations as distinct species; however divergence is likely to continue without outbreeding.\n\nNot all isolated populations will show evidence of genetic drift. Genetic homogeneity can be attributed to one of two explanations, both of which indicate that natal philopatry is not absolute within a species. Firstly, a lack of divergence may be due to founder effects, which explains how individuals that start new populations carry the genes of their source population. If only a short (in evolutionary timescales) period of time has passed, insufficient divergence may have occurred. For example, study of mitochondrial DNA microsatellites found no significant difference between colonies of black-browed albatross (\"T. melanophrys\") on the Falkland Islands and Campbell Island, despite the sites being thousands of kilometres apart. Observational evidence of white-capped albatross (\"T. [cauta] steadi\") making attempts to build nests on a south Atlantic Island, where the species had never been previously recorded, demonstrate that range extension by roaming sub-adult birds is possible. Secondly, there may be sufficient gene exchange as to prevent divergence. For example, isolated (yet geographically close) populations of the Buller’s albatross (\"T. bulleri bulleri\") have been shown to be genetically similar. This evidence has only recently, for the first time, been supported by mark-recapture data, which showed one bird marked on one of the two breeding islands was nesting on the other island.\n\nDue to the dispersal capabilities of albatross, distance between populations does not appear to be a determining factor in divergence. Actual speciation is likely to occur very slowly, as the selective pressures on the animals are the same for the vast majority of their lives, which is spent at sea. Small mutational changes in non-nuclear DNA that become fixed in small populations are likely to be the major driver of speciation. That there is minimal structural morphological difference between the genetically distinct populations is evidence for random genetic drift, rather than directional evolution due to natural selective pressure.\n\nSpeciation through natal philopatry is a self-reinforcing process. Once genetic differences are sufficient, different species may be unable to interbreed to produce viable offspring. As a result, breeding could not occur anywhere except natal island, strengthening philopatry and ultimately leading to even greater genetic divergence.\n\nPhilopatric species that do not migrate may evolve to breed cooperatively. Kin selection, of which cooperative breeding is a form, explains how individual offspring provide care for further offspring produced by their relatives. Animals that are philopatric to birthsites have increased association with family members, and, in situations where inclusive fitness is increased through cooperative breeding, may evolve such behaviour, as it will incur evolutionary benefits to families that do. Inclusive fitness is the sum of all direct and indirect fitness, where direct fitness is defined as the amount of fitness gained through producing offspring. Indirect fitness is defined as the amount of fitness gained through aiding related individuals offspring.\n\nCooperative breeding is a hierarchical social system characterized by a dominant breeding pair surrounded by subordinate helpers. The dominant breeding pair and their helpers experience costs and benefits from using this system.\n\nCosts for helpers include a fitness reduction, increased territory defense, offspring guarding and an increased cost of growth. Benefits for helpers include a reduced chance of predation, increased foraging time, territory inheritance, increased environmental conditions and an inclusive fitness.\nFor the breeding pair, costs include increased mate guarding and suppression of subordinate mating. Breeders receive benefits as reductions in offspring care and territory maintenance. Their primary benefit is an increased reproductive rate and survival.\n\nCooperative breeding causes the reproductive success of all sexually mature adults to be skewed towards one mating pair. This means the reproductive fitness of the group is held within a select few breeding members and helpers have little to no reproductive fitness. With this system, breeders gain an increased reproductive, while helpers gain an increased inclusive fitness.\n\nCooperative breeding, like speciation, can become a self-reinforcing process for a species. If the fitness benefits result in higher inclusive fitness of a family than the fitness of a non-cooperative family, the trait will eventually become fixed in the population. Over time, this may lead to the evolution of obligate cooperative breeding, as exhibited by the Australian mudnesters and Australo-Papuan babblers. Obligate cooperative breeding requires natally philopatric offspring to assist in raising offspring – breeding is unsuccessful without such help.\n\nMigrating animals also exhibit philopatry to certain important areas on their route; staging areas, stop-overs, molting areas and wintering grounds. Philopatry is generally believed to help maintain the adaptation of a population to a very specific environment (i.e., if a set of genes has evolved in a specific area, individuals that fail to return to that area may do poorly elsewhere, so natural selection will favor those who exhibit fidelity).\n\nThe level of philopatry varies within migratory families and species.\n\nThe term is sometimes also applied to animals that live in nests but do not remain in them during an unfavorable season (e.g., the winter in the temperate zone, or the dry season in the tropics), and leave to find hiding places nearby to pass the inactive period (common in various bees and wasps); this is not migration in the usual sense, as the location of the hiding place is effectively random and unique (never located or revisited except by accident), though the navigation skills required to relocate the old nest site may be similar to those of migrating animals.\n\n", "id": "2988185", "title": "Philopatry"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1482205", "text": "Reproductive success\n\nReproductive success is defined as the passing of genes onto the next generation in a way that they too can pass on those genes. This is not solely the number of offspring produced by an individual, but also, as Ronald Fisher outlined in 1915,\nthe probable reproductive success of those offspring, making mate choice (a form of sexual selection) an important factor in this success, making biological fitness a key element in the theories of natural selection and evolution.\n\nFactors like nutrition contribute to factors that influence reproductive success. These include different amounts of consumption and more specific carbohydrate to protein ratios. In some cases, the amounts or ratios of intake are more influential during certain stages of the lifespan. For example, in the Mexican fruit fly, male protein intake is critical only at eclosion. Intake at this time provides longer lasting reproductive ability. After this developmental stage, protein intake will have no effect and is not necessary for reproductive success. In addition, Ceratitis capitata males were experimented on to see how protein influence during the larval stage affects mating success. Males were fed either a high protein diet, which consisted of 6.5g/100mL, or a no protein diet during the larval stage. Males that were fed protein had more copulations than those that weren’t fed protein, which ultimately correlates with a higher mating success. Protein-deprived black blow fly males have been seen to exhibit lower numbers of oriented mounts and inseminate fewer females than more lively fed males. In still other instances, prey deprivation or an inadequate diet has been shown to lead to a partial or complete halt in male mating activity. Copulation time lasted longer for sugar-fed males than protein-fed flies, showing that carbohydrates were more necessary for a longer copulation duration.\n\nIn mammals, amounts of protein, carbohydrates, and fats are seen to influence reproductive success. This was evaluated among 28 female black bears evaluated by measuring the number of cubs born. Using different foods during the fall including corn, herbaceous, red oak, beech, and cherry, nutritional facts of protein, carbohydrate, and fat were noted, as each varied in percent compositions. Seventy-percent of the bears who had high fat and high carbohydrate diets produced cubs. Conversely, all 10 females who had low carbohydrate diets did not reproduce cubs, deeming carbohydrates a critical factor for reproductive success where fat was not a hindrance.\n\nTwo different diets were fed to Florida scrub-jays and breeding performance was noted to have different effects. One diet consisted of high protein and high fat, and the other consisting of just high fat. The significant result was that the birds with the high protein and high fat diet laid heavier eggs than the birds with the rich-in-fat diet. There was a difference in the amount of water inside the eggs, which accounted for the different weights. It’s hypothesized that the added water resulting from the adequate protein-rich and fat-rich diet may contribute to development and survival of the chick, therefore aiding reproductive success.\n\nDietary intake also improves egg production, which can also be considered to help create viable offspring. Post-mating changes are seen in organisms in response to necessary conditions for development. This is depicted in the two-spotted cricket where feeding was tested for in females. It was found that mated females exhibited more overall consumption than unmated. Observations of female crickets showed that after laying their eggs, their protein intake increased towards the end of the second day. The female crickets therefore require a larger consumption of protein to nourish the development of subsequent eggs and even mating. More specifically, using geometrical framework analysis, mated females fed off of a more protein rich diet after mating. Unmated and mated female crickets were found to prefer a 2:1 and 3.5:1 protein to carbohydrate, respectively. \nIn the Japanese quail, the influence of diet quality on egg production was studied. The diet quality differed in the percent composition of protein, with the high-protein diet having 20%, and the low-protein diet having 12%. It was found that both the number of eggs produced and the size of the eggs were greater in the high-protein diet than the low. What was found unaffected, however, was the maternal antibody transmission. Thus, immune response was not affected since there was still a source of protein, although low. This means that the bird is able to compensate for the lack of protein in the diet by protein reserves, for example.\n\n", "id": "1482205", "title": "Reproductive success"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8655788", "text": "Reciprocity (evolution)\n\nReciprocity in evolutionary biology refers to mechanisms whereby the evolution of cooperative or altruistic behaviour may be favoured by the probability of future mutual interactions. A corollary is how a desire for revenge can harm the collective and therefore be naturally deselected.\n\nThree types of reciprocity have been studied extensively:\n\nDirect reciprocity was proposed by Robert Trivers as a mechanism for the evolution of cooperation. If there are repeated encounters between the same two players in an evolutionary game in which each of them can choose either to \"cooperate\" or \"defect\", then a strategy of mutual cooperation may be favoured even if it pays each player, in the short term, to defect when the other cooperates. Direct reciprocity can lead to the\nevolution of cooperation only if the probability, w, of another encounter between the same two individuals exceeds the cost-to-benefit ratio of the altruistic act:\n\n\"In the standard framework of indirect reciprocity, there are randomly chosen pairwise encounters between members of a population; the same two individuals need not meet again. One individual acts as donor, the other as recipient. The donor can decide whether or not to cooperate. The interaction is observed by a subset of the population who might inform others. Reputation allows evolution of cooperation by indirect reciprocity. Natural selection favors strategies that base the decision to help on the reputation of the recipient: studies show that people who are more helpful are more likely to receive help.\" In many situations cooperation is favoured and it even benefits an individual to forgive an occasional defection but cooperative societies are always unstable because mutants inclined to defect can upset any balance.\n\nThe calculations of indirect reciprocity are complicated, but again a simple rule has emerged. Indirect reciprocity can only promote cooperation if the probability, q, of knowing someone’s reputation exceeds the cost-to-benefit ratio of the altruistic act:\n\nOne important problem with this explanation is that individuals may be able to evolve the capacity to obscure their reputation, reducing the probability, q, that it will be known.\n\nIndividual acts of indirect reciprocity may be classified as \"upstream\" or \"downstream\":\n\nReal populations are not well mixed, but have spatial structures or social networks which imply that some individuals interact more often than others. One approach of capturing this effect is evolutionary graph theory, in which individuals occupy the vertices of a graph. The edges determine who interacts with whom. If a cooperator pays a cost, c, for each neighbor to receive a benefit, b, and defectors have no costs, and their neighbors receive no benefits, network reciprocity can favor cooperation. The benefit-to-cost ratio must exceed the average number of people, k, per individual:\n\nRecent work shows that the benefit-to-cost ratio must exceed the mean degree of nearest neighbors, \"<k>\":\n\n\n9. Nowak, M.A. (2006). Five rules for the Evolution of Cooperation. Science 314: 1560-1563\n\n", "id": "8655788", "title": "Reciprocity (evolution)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1415963", "text": "Megatrajectory\n\nIn evolutionary biology, megatrajectories are the major evolutionary milestones and directions in the evolution of life.\n\nPosited by A. H. Knoll and Richard K. Bambach in their 2000 collaboration, \"Directionality in the History of Life,\" Knoll and Bamback argue that, in consideration of the problem of progress in evolutionary history, a middle road that encompasses both contingent and convergent features of biological evolution may be attainable through the idea of the megatrajectory:\n\nWe believe that six broad megatrajectories capture the essence of vectoral change in the history of life. The megatrajectories for a logical sequence dictated by the necessity for complexity level \"N\" to exist before \"N+1\" can evolve...In the view offered here, each megatrajectory adds new and qualitatively distinct dimensions to the way life utilizes ecospace.\n\nAccording to Knoll and Bambach, the six megatrajectories outlined by biological evolution thus far are:\n\n\nMilan M. Ćirković and Robert Bradbury, have taken the megatrajectory concept one step further by theorizing that a seventh megatrajectory exists: postbiological evolution triggered by the emergence of artificial intelligence at least equivalent to the biologically-evolved one, as well as the invention of several key technologies of the similar level of complexity and environmental impact, such as molecular nanoassembling or stellar uplifting.\n\n\n", "id": "1415963", "title": "Megatrajectory"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=178870", "text": "Atavism\n\nIn biology, an atavism is a modification of a biological structure whereby an ancestral trait reappears after having been lost through evolutionary change in previous generations. Atavisms can occur in several ways; one of which is when genes for previously existing phenotypic features are preserved in DNA, and these become expressed through a mutation that either knocks out the overriding genes for the new traits or makes the old traits override the new one. A number of traits can vary as a result of shortening of the fetal development of a trait (neoteny) or by prolongation of the same. In such a case, a shift in the time a trait is allowed to develop before it is fixed can bring forth an ancestral phenotype. Atavisms are often seen as evidence of evolution.\n\nIn social sciences, atavisms describe a cultural tendency of reversion. For example, people in the modern era reverting to the ways of thinking and acting of a former time. The word \"atavism\" is derived from the Latin \"atavus\"—a great-great-great-grandfather or, more generally, an ancestor.\n\nEvolutionarily, traits that have disappeared phenotypically do not necessarily disappear from an organism's DNA. The gene sequence often remains, but is inactive. Such an unused gene may remain in the genome for many generations. As long as the gene remains intact, a fault in the genetic control suppressing the gene can lead to it being expressed again. Sometimes, the expression of dormant genes can be induced by artificial stimulation.\n\nAtavisms have been observed in humans, such as with infants born with vestigial tails (called a \"coccygeal process\", \"coccygeal projection\", or \"caudal appendage\"). Atavism can also be seen in humans who possess large teeth, like those of other primates. In addition, a case of \"snake heart\", the presence of \"coronary circulation and myocardial architecture [which resemble] those of the reptilian heart\", has also been reported in medical literature.\n\nHowever, although they are similar, vestigial structures are distinct from atavisms. Atavisms are ancestral traits that reappear in the modern day, but they do not become vestigial organs or body parts. For example, the wings of an ostrich are vestigial structures that no longer serve their original purpose for flight, but they are not the result of a dormant ancestral trait that has reappeared. Other examples of observed atavisms include:\n\nAtavism is a key term in Joseph Schumpeter's explanation of World War I in twentieth-century liberal Europe. He defends the liberal international relations theory- that an international society built on commerce will avoid war because of war's destructiveness and comparative cost. His reason for World War I is termed \"atavism\", in which he asserts that senescent governments in Europe (those of the German Empire, Russian Empire, Ottoman Empire, and Austro-Hungarian Empire) pulled the liberal Europe into war, and that the liberal regimes of the other continental powers did not cause it. He used this idea to say that liberalism and commerce would continue to have a soothing effect in international relations, and that war would not arise between nations which are connected by commercial ties.\n\nDuring the interval between the acceptance of evolution in the mid-1800s and the rise of the modern understanding of genetics in the early 1900s, atavism was used to account for the reappearance in an individual of a trait after several generations of absence—often called a \"throw-back\". The idea that atavisms could be made to accumulate by selective breeding, or breeding back, led to breeds such as the Heck cattle. This had been bred from ancient landraces with selected primitive traits, in an attempt of \"reviving\" the aurochs, an extinct species of wild cattle. The same notions of atavisms were used by social Darwinists, who claimed that inferior races displayed atavistic traits, and represented more primitive traits than their own race. Both atavisms and Ernst Haeckel's recapitulation theory are related evolutionary progress, as development towards greater complexity and superior ability.\n\nIn addition, the concept of atavism as part of an individualistic explanation of the causes of criminal deviance was popularised by the Italian criminologist Cesare Lombroso in the 1870s. He attempted to identify physical characteristics common to criminals and labeled those he found as atavistic, 'throw-back' traits that determined 'primitive' criminal behavior. His statistical evidence and the closely related idea of eugenics have long since been abandoned by the scientific community, but the concept that physical traits may affect the likelihood of criminal or unethical behavior in a person still has some scientific support.\n\n\n", "id": "178870", "title": "Atavism"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10207027", "text": "Autoconstructive evolution\n\nAutoconstructive evolution is a process in which the entities undergoing evolutionary change are themselves responsible for the construction of their own offspring and thus for aspects of the evolutionary process itself. Because biological evolution is always autoconstructive, this term mainly occurs in evolutionary computation, to distinguish artificial life type systems from conventional genetic algorithms where the GA performs replication artificially. The term was coined by Lee Spector.\n\n", "id": "10207027", "title": "Autoconstructive evolution"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11743104", "text": "Infinite alleles model\n\nThe infinite alleles model is a mathematical model for calculating genetic mutations. The Japanese geneticist Motoo Kimura and American geneticist James F. Crow (1964) introduced the \"infinite alleles model\", an attempt to determine for a finite diploid population what proportion of loci would be homozygous. This was, in part, motivated by assertions by other geneticists that more than 50 percent of \"Drosophila\" loci were heterozygous, a claim they initially doubted. In order to answer this question they assumed first, that there were a large enough number of alleles so that any mutation would lead to a different allele (that is the probability of back mutation to the original allele would be low enough to be negligible); and second, that the mutations would result in a number of different outcomes from neutral to .\n\nThey determined that in the neutral case, the probability that an individual would be homozygous, \"F\", was:\n\nwhere \"u\" is the mutation rate, and \"N\" is the effective population size. The effective number of alleles \"n\" maintained in a population is defined as the inverse of the homozygosity, that is\n\nwhich is a lower bound for the actual number of alleles in the population.\n\nIf the effective population is large, then a large number of alleles can be maintained. However, this result only holds for the \"neutral\" case, and is not necessarily true for the case when some alleles are subject to selection, i.e. more or less fit than others, for example when the fittest genotype is a heterozygote (a situation often referred to as overdominance or heterosis). \n\nIn the case of overdominance, because Mendel's second law (the law of segregation) necessarily results in the production of homozygotes (which are by definition in this case, less fit), this means that population will always harbor a number of less fit individuals, which leads to a decrease in the average fitness of the population. This is sometimes referred to as \"genetic load\", in this case it is a special kind of load known as \"segregational load\". Crow and Kimura showed that at equilibrium conditions, for a given strength of selection (\"s\"), that there would be an upper limit to the number of fitter alleles (polymorphisms) that a population could harbor for a particular locus. Beyond this number of alleles, the selective advantage of presence of those alleles in heterozygous genotypes would be cancelled out by continual generation of less fit homozygous genotypes.\n\nThese results became important in the formation of the neutral theory, because neutral (or nearly neutral) alleles create no such segregational load, and allow for the accumulation of a great deal of polymorphism. When Richard Lewontin and J. Hubby published their groundbreaking results in 1966 which showed high levels of genetic variation in Drosophila via protein electrophoresis, the theoretical results from the infinite alleles model were used by Kimura and others to support the idea that this variation would have to be neutral (or result in excess segregational load).\n\n\n", "id": "11743104", "title": "Infinite alleles model"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2915834", "text": "Error threshold (evolution)\n\nIn evolutionary biology and population genetics, the error threshold (or critical mutation rate) is a limit on the number of base pairs a self-replicating molecule may have before mutation will destroy the information in subsequent generations of the molecule. The error threshold is crucial to understanding \"Eigen's paradox\".\n\nThe error threshold is a concept in the origins of life (abiogenesis), in particular of very early life, before the advent of DNA. It is postulated that the first self-replicating molecules might have been small ribozyme-like RNA molecules. These molecules consist of strings of base pairs or \"digits\", and their order is a code that directs how the molecule interacts with its environment. All replication is subject to mutation error. During the replication process, each digit has a certain probability of being replaced by some other digit, which changes the way the molecule interacts with its environment, and may increase or decrease its fitness, or ability to reproduce, in that environment.\n\nIt was noted by Manfred Eigen in his 1971 paper (Eigen 1971) that this mutation process places a limit on the number of digits a molecule may have. If a molecule exceeds this critical size, the effect of the mutations become overwhelming and a runaway mutation process will destroy the information in subsequent generations of the molecule. The error threshold is also controlled by the fitness landscape for the molecules. Molecules that differ only by a few mutations may be thought of as \"close\" to each other, while those that differ by many mutations are distant from each other. Molecules that are very fit, and likely to reproduce, have a \"high\" fitness, those less fit have \"low\" fitness.\n\nThese ideas of proximity and height form the intuitive concept of the \"fitness landscape\". If a particular sequence and its neighbors have a high fitness, they will form a quasispecies and will be able to support longer sequence lengths than a fit sequence with few fit neighbors, or a less fit neighborhood of sequences. Also, it was noted by Wilke (Wilke 2005) that the error threshold concept does not apply in portions of the landscape where there are lethal mutations, in which the induced mutation yields zero fitness and prohibits the molecule from reproducing.\n\nEigen's paradox is one of the most intractable puzzles in the study of the origins of life. It is thought that the error threshold concept described above limits the size of self replicating molecules to perhaps a few hundred digits, yet almost all life on earth requires much longer molecules to encode their genetic information. This problem is handled in living cells by enzymes that repair mutations, allowing the encoding molecules to reach sizes on the order of millions of base pairs. These large molecules must, of course, encode the very enzymes that repair them, and herein lies Eigen's paradox, first put forth by Manfred Eigen in his 1971 paper (Eigen 1971). Simply stated, Eigen's paradox amounts to the following:\n\n\nThis is a chicken-or-egg kind of a paradox, with an even more difficult solution. Which came first, the large genome or the error correction enzymes? A number of solutions to this paradox have been proposed:\n\n\nConsider a 3-digit molecule [A,B,C] where A, B, and C can take on the values 0 and 1. There are eight such sequences ([000], [001], [010], [011], [100], [101], [110], and [111]). Let's say that the [000] molecule is the most fit; upon each replication it produces an average of formula_1 copies, where formula_2. This molecule is called the \"master sequence\". The other seven sequences are less fit; they each produce only 1 copy per replication. The replication of each of the three digits is done with a mutation rate of μ. In other words, at every replication of a digit of a sequence, there is a probability formula_3 that it will be erroneous; 0 will be replaced by 1 or vice versa. Let's ignore double mutations and the death of molecules (the population will grow infinitely), and divide the eight molecules into three classes depending on their Hamming distance from the master sequence:\n\nNote that the number of sequences for distance \"d\" is just the binomial coefficient formula_4 for L=3, and that each sequence can be visualized as the vertex of an L=3 dimensional cube, with each edge of the cube specifying a mutation path in which the change Hamming distance is either zero or ±1. It can be seen that, for example, one third of the mutations of the [001] molecules will produce [000] molecules, while the other two thirds will produce the class 2 molecules [011] and [101]. We can now write the expression for the child populations formula_5 of class \"i\" in terms of the parent populations formula_6.\n\nwhere the matrix \"'w\"’ that incorporates natural selection and mutation, according to quasispecies model, is given by:\n\nwhere formula_9 is the probability that an entire molecule will be replicated successfully. The eigenvectors of the w matrix will yield the equilibrium population numbers for each class. For example, if the mutation rate μ is zero, we will have Q=1, and the equilibrium concentrations will be formula_10. The master sequence, being the fittest will be the only one to survive. If we have a replication fidelity of Q=0.95 and genetic advantage of a=1.05, then the equilibrium concentrations will be roughly formula_11. It can be seen that the master sequence is not as dominant, however, sequences with low Hamming distance are in majority. If we have a replication fidelity of Q approaching 0, then the equilibrium concentrations will be roughly formula_12. This is a population with equal number of each of 8 sequences. (If we had perfectly equal population of all sequences, we would have populations of [1,3,3,1]/8.)\n\nIf we now go to the case where the number of base pairs is large, say L=100, we obtain behavior that resembles a phase transition. The plot below on the left shows a series of equilibrium concentrations divided by the binomial coefficient formula_13.\n(This multiplication will show the population for an individual sequence at that distance, and will yield a flat line for an equal distribution.) The selective advantage of the master sequence is set at a=1.05. The horizontal axis is the Hamming distance \"d\" . The various curves are for various total mutation rates formula_14. It is seen that for low values of the total mutation rate, the population consists of a quasispecies gathered in the neighborhood of the master sequence. Above a total mutation rate of about 1-Q=0.05, the distribution quickly spreads out to populate all sequences equally. The plot below on the right shows the fractional population of the master sequence as a function of the total mutation rate. Again it is seen that below a critical mutation rate of about 1-Q=0.05, the master sequence contains most of the population, while above this rate, it contains only about formula_15 of the total population.\n\nIt can be seen that there is a sharp transition at a value of \"1-Q\"  just a bit larger than 0.05. For mutation rates above this value, the population of the master sequence drops to practically zero. Above this value, it dominates.\n\nIn the limit as \"L\" approaches infinity, the system does in fact have a phase transition at a critical value of Q: formula_16. One could think of the overall mutation rate (1-Q) as a sort of \"temperature\", which \"melts\" the fidelity of the molecular sequences above the critical \"temperature\" of formula_17. For faithful replication to occur, the information must be \"frozen\" into the genome.\n\n", "id": "2915834", "title": "Error threshold (evolution)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12664042", "text": "Sex-limited genes\n\nSex-limited genes are genes that are present in both sexes of sexually reproducing species but are expressed in only one sex and remain 'turned off' in the other. In other words, sex-limited genes cause the two sexes to show different traits or phenotypes, despite having the same genotype. This term is restricted to autosomal traits, and should not be confused with sex-linked characteristics, which have to do with genetic differences on the sex chromosomes (see sex-determination system). Sex-limited genes are also distinguished from sex-influenced genes, where the same gene will show differential expression in each sex. Sex-influenced genes commonly show a dominant/recessive relationship, where the same gene will have a dominant effect in one sex and a recessive effect in the other (for example, male pattern baldness).\n\nSex-limited genes are responsible for sexual dimorphism, which is a phenotypic (directly observable) difference between males and females of the same species. These differences can be reflected in size, color, behavior (ex: levels of aggression), and morphology. An example of sex-limited genes are genes which instruct the male elephant seals to grow big and fight, at the same time instructing female seals to grow small and avoid fights. These genes are also responsible for some female beetles' inability to grow exaggerated mandibles, research that is discussed in detail later in this article.\n\nThe overall point of sex-limited genes is to resolve intralocus sexual conflict. In other words, these genes try to resolve the \"push-pull\" between males and females over trait values for optimal phenotype. Without these genes, organisms would be forced to settle on an \"average \"trait value, incurring costs on both sexes. With these genes, it is possible to 'turn off' the genes in one sex, allowing both sexes to attain (or at least, approach very closely) their optimal phenotypes.\n\nUnsurprisingly, the idea of sex-limited genes was initially developed by Charles Darwin himself in 1871 in his book \"The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex.\" He does not distinguish between sex-limited, sex-linked, and sex-influenced genes, but refers to any gene that expresses differently between sexes as sex-limited. While this concept was still in its infancy, Darwin catalyzed the further development of sex-related selection. Thomas Hunt Morgan, fully aware of this confusing terminology, published an article in \"The American Naturalist \"in 1914 titled \"Sex-Linked and Sex-Limited Inheritance.\" This article directly acknowledges that Darwin applied the term sex-limited whenever a characteristic seemed specific to one sex. Morgan proposes the definitions for sex-linked genes and sex-limited genes that we still use today (and that were defined in the introduction above). This paper helped to distinguish between these two similar concepts and clarify much confusion in the scientific community at the time. Morgan's paper was followed by several others involving sex-limited genes and their expression as traits. One of the more notable examples is John H. Gerould's \"Inheritance of White Wing Color, a Sex-Limited (Sex-Controlled) Variation in Yellow Pierid Butterflies,\" published in \"Genetics \"in 1923 (and edited slightly in 1924). Gerould observed that in this species of butterfly, females naturally occur as yellow or white, while males only occur with yellow coloration. He extensively explores this apparently sex-limited trait from a genetic perspective in this ground-breaking 50 page paper. To conclude the notable advancements in the early stages of the development of sex-limited genes, a brief discussion of R. A. Fisher is necessary. Commonly hailed as one of the best evolutionary biologists of his time, Fisher was also a talented geneticist. His book \"The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection\", published in 1930, over 20 years before the double-helix shape of DNA was discovered, was the first attempt to explain Darwin's theories within the foundation of genetics. Chapter 6 of this book is titled \"Sexual Reproduction and Sexual Selection\" and includes a genetic interpretation of Darwin's initial idea of sex-limited genes. After these groundbreaking works, papers continue to be published further exploring the causes, mechanisms, evolutionary advantages, and more of sex-limited genes.\n\nMany studies have been published exploring the genetic basis of sex-limited genes. One paper, published in \"Evolution\", evaluates the hypothesis that sex-limited traits can arise in two ways. The alleles responsible for sexual dimorphism can be limited to expression in only one sex when they first appear, or the alleles could begin by being expressed in both sexes then become modified (repressed or promoted) in one sex by modifier genes or regulatory elements. The concept of this study was to examine female hybrids from species where males displayed different types of ornamental traits (elongated feathers, wattles, color patches). The assumption is that different hypotheses about male-specific expression will yield different results in female hybrids. The methods and materials of the experiment are discussed in detail in the paper, but the important result that emerged was that NO female hybrids expressed any of the ornamental traits found in the parent males. Two interpretations of these results are possible: the dimorphic alleles were initially only expressed in males, or the alleles were initially expressed in both and then were suppressed in females or became limited to males by regulatory regions that are \"completely dominant\" in hybrids. The most likely genomic explanation for initial expression in both species then modification is involvement of \"cis\"-dominance, where the factors that modify the gene are located next to the gene on the chromosome. (This is in contrast to \"trans\"-dominance, where mobile products that can affect distant genes are produced.) These factors can be in the form of promoter regions, which can be either be suppressed or activated by hormones. This experiment also demonstrates that these alleles come under regulatory control very quickly. This is because none of the ornamentation seen in males is seen in the \"very next \"generation. These conclusions make it likely that at least some male-specific (thus, sex-limited) genes cue their expression by hormone levels - the absence of estrogen or the presence of testosterone.\n\nBecause sex-limited genes are present in both sexes but only expressed in one, this allows the unexpressed genes to be hidden from selection. On a short-term scale, this means that during one generation, only the sex that expresses the sex-limited trait(s) of interest will be affected by selection. The remaining half of the gene pool for these traits will be unaffected by selection because they are hidden (unexpressed) in the genes of the other sex. Since a portion of the alleles for these sex-limited traits are hidden from selection, this occurrence has been termed 'storage-effect'. On a long-term scale, this storage effect can have significant effects on selection, especially if selection is fluctuating over a long period of time. It is inarguable that selection will fluctuate over time with varying levels of environmental stability. For example, fluctuations in population density can drive selection on sex-limited traits. In less dense populations, females will have less opportunity to choose between males for reproduction. In this case, attractive males may experience both reduced reproductive success and increased predation pressure. Thus, selection on males for sex-limited traits such as increased size (elephant seals) and weaponry (claws on fiddler crabs, horns on rhinoceros beetles) will change direction with fluctuation in population density.\n\nJohn Parsch and Hans Ellegren defined \"genes that differ in expression between females and males\" as sex-biased genes. While this definition is more broad, sex-limited genes are certainly included in this category. One of the key principles of sex-biased gene expression that Parsch and Ellegren stressed in their paper in February 2013 is that of rapid evolution. They assert that a gene's sex bias can vary among different types of tissues throughout the body or throughout development, making the level of sex bias a fluid, rather than static, property. This makes it possible, then, that the rapid evolution seen in sex-biased genes is not an inherent property of their sex bias, but a property of some other feature. The paper offers expression breadth, the number of tissue types in which the genes are expressed, as an example of a feature correlated to sex-biased genes. It is known that genes with limited expression (in only one type of tissue) generally evolve faster than those with a higher expression breadth, and sex-biased genes are often restricted in their expression, such as to only the testes or ovaries. Thus, it is likely that sex-biased (including sex-limited) genes will evolve faster than the average genetic information. Parsch and Ellegren also assert that \"sex-biased genes expressed only in sex-limited reproductive tissues evolve faster than unbiased genes that are expressed only in a single, non-reproductive tissue.\" That is, genes that have a bias toward any kind of reproductive tissue (testes or ovaries) seem to show faster evolution than genes expressed in non-gonadal tissues, despite the number of tissues in which they are expressed. This makes sense in the context of genes with reproductive function evolving more quickly, a generally observed pattern in evolutionary biology.\n\nSexual antagonism occurs when two species have conflicting optimal fitness strategies concerning reproduction (see link in introduction paragraph). Multiple matings is a classic example of competing optimal strategies. Males, who typically have a much lower overall investment in reproduction, may benefit from more frequent matings. Females, however, invest much more in reproduction and can be endangered, harmed, or even killed by multiple matings.\n\nIn 2010, Hosken et al. completed an important study exploring the effects of sexually antagonistic selection on sex-limited trait expression. They asked if sex-specific trait selection always resolved intralocus conflict, as it was believed to do. By using a species of flour beetle, \"Gnatocerus cornutus\", exhibiting sex-limited traits in the form of exaggerated mandible size, they were able to test this hypothesis. Exaggerated mandibles are \"only \"developed in males; females never develop exaggerated mandibles. The point of this experiment was to determine how mandibles affect fitness. If these sex-limited genes are truly quelling intralocus sexual conflict, male mandible size should have no effect on female fitness. After selecting for males with exaggerated mandibles (full materials and methods can be found within the paper), it was experimentally determined that males with exaggerated mandibles had a higher fitness - they experienced increased fighting and mating success. It was also found, however, that females found in the populations of males with exaggerated mandibles had lower fitness (as determined by lifetime reproductive success, LRS) relative to the fitness of females in populations with males with smaller mandibles. Since this male sex-limited trait affects female fitness, intralocus sexual conflict has \"not \"been resolved. This highlights the importance of sexual conflict to evolution, because it cannot simply be defused by sex-limited trait expression.\n\nLater the same year, a paper in \"Evolution \"also came to the same conclusions about sexual antagonism in relation to sex-limited genes. They developed a mathematical model to show that the fitness costs of sexual antagonism, even when rare, will usually overwhelm the benefits of sexually concordant selection. (Sexually concordant selection occurs when selection favors the same alleles in both sexes but differs in relative strength between them.) Through several advanced calculations, they concluded that even a small relative amount of sexual antagonism will overwhelm any benefit harvested from sexually concordant selection. Coming to the same conclusion as Hosken et al., they demonstrated mathematically that when sex-limited gene expression attempts to resolve sexual antagonism, it is likely to produce negative long-term fitness consequences. This result is seen in the experiment with beetles above, where the females demonstrate reduced fitness in response to males selected for larger mandibles. So, with mathematical support and a lack of support for strong fitness benefits as a result of sexually concordant selection, the paper concludes that sex-specific selection is more likely to incur costs than benefits to sexually reproducing species.\n\nAnimal behavior (see ethology) encompasses so many disciplines that it is impossible not to see it in some capacity in almost all primary literature involving live animals. While the examples above certainly contain aspects of animal behavior, a more overt example of it in relation to sex-limited traits is detailed in a Teplitsky et al. paper (2010) centering on breeding time in red-billed gulls. This experiment deals with breeding time, an aspect of reproductive biology. Reproduction and sexual behavior are two key aspects of animal behavior, as they are universally expressed in some way throughout the animal kingdom.\n\nBreeding time in red-billed gulls is expressed only in females, because only females lay eggs. Male care, however, affects female breeding performance substantially. This qualifies breeding time as a sex-limited trait because it is expressed only in one sex but can be affected by both (similarly to Hosken's beetle experiment above). By following a natural population of red-billed gulls for 46 years, Teplitsky et al. came to an unexpected conclusion - while laying date (aka breeding time) is only expressed in females, the trait is only heritable in males. This is atypical because sex-limited traits are almost always heritable within the sex in which they are expressed.\n\nFor this species, the timing of egg-laying has much to do with male behavior. Males can affect female reproductive success so strongly because for the 20 days up to egg-laying, females spend up to 80% of their time in the nest. This leaves males with the responsibility of providing food regularly and securing (and maintaining) a high-quality territory for nesting. This phenomenon of the genetics of one individual affecting those of another individual is known as \"indirect genetic effects\". For this population, at least, possible explanations for this atypical heritability pattern exist. While controlling female health and safety, males are responsible for the timing of the start of courtship feeding, as well. These populations also typically have excesses of females, allowing males to exert even further choice in the form of mate choice. These factors in combination give males a great opportunity to express their \"laying date genotype\". In spite of the presence of directional selection and significant male heritability for breeding time, no advancement of breeding time was seen during the 46 years of this experiment. This does not discount the significance of the paper's other results however - one of the most significant being that here a \"female trait (laying date) is largely determined by genetic characteristics of its mate\".\n\nEpigenetics is the inheritance of additional marks to the genome without changes in its sequence. These factors epigenetic factors may also be sex-limited. Genomic imprinting for example, silencing of one parental allele by DNA methylation, for which sex-limited imprinting has been proposed to resolve intralocus conflict. Genomic imprinting has been shown to be indistinguishable from non-imprinted systems at the population level in some cases, having equivalent evolutionary models. However, this does not hold for sex-limited models of sex-limited imprinting which behave differently depending on which sex imprinting occurs and the parental sex of imprinted allele. Specifically, this affects whether alleles are imprinted in consecutive generations with different evolutionary trajectories (under the same selection fitnesses) arising purely due to sex-limited epigenetics. Thus sex-limited epigenetic traits may have played a pivotal role in the evolution of mammals and other species, particularly as a mechanism to ameliorate intralocus conflict between the sexes.\n\nOverall, sex-limited genes carry with them several complex cost to benefit ratios which call for further analysis. For example, while they allow for greater opportunities of sexual dimorphism so both sexes can reach much closer to their optimal phenotypes, they also incur fitness costs on sexually reproducing species. Since Charles Darwin's revolutionary book was published in 1871, there have been many studies done on the nature of these genes. The scientific literature dealing with the concepts of sexual dimorphism and sex-limited genes extends far past what has been listed here. The genetic and mechanistic details of these genes are still being discovered through ongoing research today. It is becoming apparent that a deeper understanding sex-limited genes will be increasingly important as the fields of evolutionary biology and genetics advance.\n\n", "id": "12664042", "title": "Sex-limited genes"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7710370", "text": "Suppressor mutation\n\nA suppressor mutation is a second mutation that alleviates or reverts the phenotypic effects of an already existing mutation in a process defined synthetic rescue. Genetic suppression therefore restores the phenotype seen prior to the original background mutation. Suppressor mutations are useful for identifying new genetic sites which affect a biological process of interest. They also provide evidence between functionally interacting molecules and intersecting biological pathways.\n\nIntragenic suppression results from suppressor mutations that occur in the same gene as the original mutation. In a classic study, Francis Crick (et al.) used intragenic suppression to study the fundamental nature of the genetic code. From this study it was shown that genes are expressed as non-overlapping triplets (codons). \nResearchers showed that mutations caused by either a single base insertion (+) or a single base deletion (-) could be \"suppressed\" or restored by a second mutation of the opposite sign, as long as the two mutations occurred in the same vicinity of the gene. This led to the conclusion that genes needed to be read in a specific \"reading frame\" and a single base insertion or deletion would shift the reading frame (frameshift mutation) in such a way that the remaining DNA would code for a different polypeptide than the one intended. Therefore, researchers concluded that the second mutation of opposite sign suppresses the original mutation by restoring the reading frame, as long as the portion between the two mutations is not critical for protein function. \n\nIn addition to the reading frame, Crick also used suppressor mutations to determine codon size. It was found that while one and two base insertions/deletions of the same sign resulted in a mutant phenotype, deleting or inserting three bases could give a wild type phenotype. From these results it was concluded that an inserted or deleted triplet does not disturb the reading frame and the genetic code is in fact a triplet.\n\nIntergenic (also known as extragenic) suppression relieves the effects of a mutation in one gene by a mutation somewhere else within the genome. The second mutation is not on the same gene as the original mutation. Intergenic suppression is useful for identifying and studying interactions between molecules, such as proteins. For example, a mutation which disrupts the complementary interaction between protein molecules may be compensated for by a second mutation elsewhere in the genome that restores or provides a suitable alternative interaction between those molecules. Several proteins of biochemical, signal transduction, and gene expression pathways have been identified using this approach. Examples of such pathways include receptor-ligand interactions as well as the interaction of components involved in DNA replication, transcription, and translation.\n\nSuppressor mutations also occur in genes that code for virus structural proteins. To create a viable phage T4 virus (see image), a balance of structural components is required. An amber mutant of phage T4 contains a mutation that changes a codon for an amino acid in a protein to the nonsense stop codon TAG (see stop codon and nonsense mutation). If, upon infection, an amber mutant defective in a gene encoding a needed structural component of phage T4 is weakly suppressed (in an \"E. coli\" host containing a specific altered tRNA – see nonsense suppressor), it will produce a reduced number of the needed structural component. As a consequence few if any viable phage are formed. However, it was found that viable phage could sometimes be produced in the host with the weak nonsense suppressor if a second amber mutation in a gene that encodes another structural protein is also present in the phage genome. It was found that the reason the second amber mutation could suppress the first one is that the two numerically reduced structural proteins would now be in balance. For instance, if the first amber mutation caused a reduction of tail fibers to one tenth the normal level, most phage particles produced would have insufficient tail fibers to be infective. However, if a second amber mutation is defective in a base plate component and causes one tenth the number of base plates to be made, this may restore the balance of tail fibers and base plates, and thus allow infective phage to be produced.\n\nIn microbial genetics, a revertant is a mutant that has reverted to its former genotype or to the original phenotype by means of a suppressor mutation, or else by compensatory mutation somewhere in the gene (second site reversion).\n\n\n", "id": "7710370", "title": "Suppressor mutation"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5658554", "text": "Paleobiology\n\nPaleobiology (UK & Canadian English: palaeobiology) is a growing and comparatively new discipline which combines the methods and findings of the natural science biology with the methods and findings of the earth science paleontology. It is occasionally referred to as \"geobiology\".\n\nPaleobiological research uses biological field research of current biota and of fossils millions of years old to answer questions about the molecular evolution and the evolutionary history of life. In this scientific quest, macrofossils, microfossils and trace fossils are typically analyzed. However, the 21st-century biochemical analysis of DNA and RNA samples offers much promise, as does the biometric construction of phylogenetic trees.\n\nAn investigator in this field is known as a paleobiologist.\n\n\nThe founder or \"father\" of modern paleobiology was Baron Franz Nopcsa (1877 to 1933), a Hungarian scientist trained at the University of Vienna. He initially termed the discipline \"paleophysiology.\"\n\nHowever, credit for coining the word \"paleobiology\" itself should go to Professor Charles Schuchert. He proposed the term in 1904 so as to initiate \"a broad new science\" joining \"traditional paleontology with the evidence and insights of geology and isotopic chemistry.\"\n\nOn the other hand, Charles Doolittle Walcott, a Smithsonian adventurer, has been cited as the \"founder of Precambrian paleobiology.\" Although best known as the discoverer of the mid-Cambrian Burgess shale animal fossils, in 1883 this American curator found the \"first Precambrian fossil cells known to science\" – a stromatolite reef then known as \"Cryptozoon\" algae. In 1899 he discovered the first acritarch fossil cells, a Precambrian algal phytoplankton he named \"Chuaria\". Lastly, in 1914, Walcott reported \"minute cells and chains of cell-like bodies\" belonging to Precambrian purple bacteria.\n\nLater 20th-century paleobiologists have also figured prominently in finding Archaean and Proterozoic eon microfossils: In 1954, Stanley A. Tyler and Elso S. Barghoorn described 2.1 billion-year-old cyanobacteria and fungi-like microflora at their Gunflint Chert fossil site. Eleven years later, Barghoorn and J. William Schopf reported finely-preserved Precambrian microflora at their Bitter Springs site of the Amadeus Basin, Central Australia.\n\nFinally, in 1993, Schopf discovered O-producing blue-green bacteria at his 3.5 billion-year-old Apex Chert site in Pilbara Craton, Marble Bar, in the northwestern part of Western Australia. So paleobiologists were at last homing in on the origins of the Precambrian \"Oxygen catastrophe.\"\n\n\n\n\n", "id": "5658554", "title": "Paleobiology"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14310137", "text": "FSTAT (software)\n\nFSTAT is a computer program to estimate and test gene diversities and statistics. The program computes Nei and Weir & Cockerham families, estimators of gene diversities and F-statistics.\n\nThe software was developed by Jérôme Goudet of the Department of Ecology & Evolution at the University of Lausanne. It was last updated on February, 2002, with version 2.9.3.2. It operates on DOS and Microsoft Windows Operating systems\n\n\n", "id": "14310137", "title": "FSTAT (software)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12636406", "text": "Fisher's principle\n\nFisher's principle is an evolutionary model that explains why the sex ratio of most species that produce offspring through sexual reproduction is approximately 1:1 between males and females. It was famously outlined by Ronald Fisher in his 1930 book \"The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection\" (but incorrectly attributed to Fisher as original). Nevertheless, A. W. F. Edwards has remarked that it is \"probably the most celebrated argument in evolutionary biology\". Specifically, Fisher couched his argument in terms of parental expenditure, and predicted that parental expenditure on both sexes should be equal. Sex ratios that are 1:1 are hence known as \"Fisherian\", and those that are not 1:1 are \"non-Fisherian\" or \"extraordinary\" and occur because they break the assumptions made in Fisher's model. Many eusocial wasps, such as the \"Polistes fuscatus\" and the \"Polistes exclamans\" seem to exhibit such a ratio at times.\n\nW.D. Hamilton gave the following basic explanation in his 1967 paper on \"Extraordinary sex ratios\", given the condition that males and females cost equal amounts to produce:\n\nIn modern language, the 1:1 ratio is the evolutionarily stable strategy (ESS).\n\nIn Chapter 6 \"Sexual Reproduction and Sexual Selection\", Fisher wrote under the heading \"Natural Selection and the sex-ratio\" (page 141) the explanation described by Eric Charnov and James J. Bull as being \"characteristically terse\" and \"cryptic\":\n\nFisher's principle is an early example of a model in which genes for greater production of either sex become equalized in the population, because each sex supplies exactly half the genes of all future generations.\n\nFisher's principle is rooted in the concept of frequency-dependent selection, though Fisher's principle is not frequency-dependent selection \"per se\". Frequency-dependent selection, in this scenario, is the logic that the probability of an individual being able to breed is dependent on the frequency of the opposite sex in relation to its own sex. It was first described by Darwin in 1871.\n\nFisher's principle extends frequency dependence to explain how natural selection can act on genes that affect the frequency of an individual's grandchildren without affecting the frequency of their children. Fisher predicted that parents will invest their resources equally between each sex of offspring, because each sex supplies exactly half the genes of all future generations. As a result, those genes that cause parents to invest unequally in the sexes will tend to be selected against. Fisher was aware that in humans, more boys are born, whilst boys are also more likely to die in infancy. As a consequence, he reasoned that because parents tend to invest less in boys because more boys die before the end of the period of parental care there is a higher rate of male births to equalise parental investment in each sex.\n\nFisher's principle is also the precursor to evolutionary game theory. R.H. MacArthur (1965) first suggested applying to sex ratios the language of game theory, and this was subsequently picked up by W.D. Hamilton (1967) who termed the equilibrium point the \"unbeatable strategy\". Hamilton's unbeatable strategy was refined by John Maynard Smith and George R. Price (1973) into their concept of the evolutionarily stable strategy, i.e. one which cannot be invaded by a mutant strategy.\n\nFisher's concept of parental expenditure (now termed parental investment), developed particularly by Robert Trivers is now an important concept in ecology.\n\nHistorical research by A.W.F. Edwards has shown that the argument is incorrectly attributed to Fisher (the name is in common use and is unlikely to change). Charles Darwin had originally formulated a similar but somewhat confused argument in the first edition of \"The Descent of Man\" but withdrew it for the second edition Fisher only had a copy of the latter, and quotes Darwin in \"The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection\".\n\nSpecifically, Carl Düsing of the University of Jena published this in three works between 1883–84, and this is essentially identical to Shaw and Mohler's later model.\n\nAs \"probably the most celebrated argument in evolutionary biology\", Fisher's principle is a staple of popular science books on evolution. For example, see:\n\n\nFor those wishing more advanced treatment, see the 2002 book \"Sex Ratios: Concepts and Research Methods\" edited by Ian C.W. Hardy, (chapters 1 and 2 by Ido Pen and Franz J. Weissing.)\n", "id": "12636406", "title": "Fisher's principle"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9476628", "text": "List of Y-DNA single-nucleotide polymorphisms\n\n\n", "id": "9476628", "title": "List of Y-DNA single-nucleotide polymorphisms"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16591429", "text": "Deep homology\n\nIn evolutionary developmental biology, the concept of deep homology is used to describe cases where growth and differentiation processes are governed by genetic mechanisms that are homologous and deeply conserved across a wide range of species.\n\nIn 1822, the French zoologist Étienne Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire dissected a crayfish, discovering that its body is organised like a vertebrate's, but inverted belly to back (dorsoventrally):\n\nGeoffroy's homology theory was denounced by the leading French zoologist of his day, Georges Cuvier, but in 1994, Geoffroy was shown to be correct.\n\nIn 1915, Santiago Ramon y Cajal mapped the neural connections of the optic lobes of a fly, finding that these resembled those of vertebrates.\n\nIn 1978, Edward Lewis helped to found evolutionary developmental biology, discovering that homeotic genes regulated embryonic development in fruit flies.\n\nWhereas ordinary homology is seen in the pattern of structures such as limb bones of mammals that are evidently related, deep homology can apply to groups of animals that have quite dissimilar anatomy: vertebrates (with endoskeletons made of bone and cartilage) and arthropods (with exoskeletons made of chitin) nevertheless have limbs that are constructed using similar recipes or \"algorithms\".\n\nWithin the metazoa, homeotic genes control differentiation along major body axes, and pax genes (especially PAX6) help to control the development of the eye and other sensory organs. The deep homology applies across widely separated groups, such as in the eyes of mammals and the structurally quite different compound eyes of insects.\n\nSimilarly, hox genes help to form an animal's segmentation pattern. HoxA and HoxD, that regulate finger and toe formation in mice, control the development of ray fins in zebrafish; these structures had until then been considered non-homologous.\n\nIn early 2010, a team at The University of Texas at Austin led by Edward Marcotte developed an algorithm that identifies deeply homologous genetic modules in unicellular organisms, plants, and non-human animals based on phenotypes (such as traits and developmental defects). The technique aligns phenotypes across organisms based on orthology (a type of homology) of genes involved in the phenotypes.\n\n", "id": "16591429", "title": "Deep homology"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16141600", "text": "Syntelog\n\nSyntelog: a special case of gene homology where sets of genes are derived from the same ancestral genomic region. This may arise from speciation events, or through whole or partial genome duplication events (e.g. polyploidy). This term is distinct from ortholog, paralog, in-paralog, out-paralog, and xenolog because it refers only to genes' evolutionary history evidenced by sequence similarity and relative genomic position.\n\nComparison between two genomic regions of \"Arabidopsis thaliana\" derived from its most recent genome duplication event. Syntelogs are indicated by red lines connecting regions of sequence similarly (red boxes):\n\nSequence analysis and visualization of syntelogs performed by GEvo. Sequences were compared using the BlastZ algorithm.\n\n", "id": "16141600", "title": "Syntelog"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17268791", "text": "Competitive altruism\n\nCompetitive altruism is a possible mechanism for the persistence of cooperative behaviors, specifically those that are performed unconditionally. The theory of reciprocal altruism can be used to explain behaviors that are performed by a donor who receives some sort of benefit in the future. When no such compensation is received, however, reciprocity fails to explain altruistic behavior.\n\nTo explain competitive altruism, Roberts uses the example of preening among birds. Because certain birds cannot reach parasites on all parts of their bodies, particularly their necks, they benefit from preening one another. For any given bird, there is an entire flock of potential preeners, who compete in hopes of establishing a beneficial relationship. Cheaters, or those birds that try to be preened without preening others, do not compete and thus are excluded from these relationships. Their fitness is lowered because they are ostracized by members of the flock.\n\nMcNamara et al. quantitatively analyzed this theory. Like Robert Axelrod, they created a computer program to simulate repeated interactions among individuals. The program involved players with two genetically determined traits, a ‘cooperative trait’ and a ‘choosiness trait.’ They found the following results:\n‘Paradoxical’ trait combinations yield particularly low payoffs: individuals with low choosiness but high effort tend to get exploited by their co-players; individuals with high choosiness but low effort waste their time searching for better co-players, which are, however, unlikely to accept them. The positive correlation between choosiness and cooperativeness leads to a positive assortment between cooperative types – an essential feature of all mechanisms that promote cooperation.\n\nThe development of such cooperation requires variation in the degree of cooperation and choosiness, which the researchers attributed to genetic mutation and variation. McNamara et al. also determined that since a period of searching is required for ‘mutually acceptable’ players to find one another, competitive altruism is more likely to arise in animals with long life spans.\n\nTo relate this condition to the prisoner's dilemma, an individual may benefit the most in a one-time interaction with another by defecting (i.e. receiving benefits without incurring any cost to itself). However, in an iterated prisoner's dilemma, where individuals interact more than once, if the act of defecting makes the individual less likely to attract a fit mate in the future, then cooperative behavior will be selected for.\n\nThis selection for cooperation is even stronger if an individual's action in an interaction is observed by third-party individuals, for the possibility of forming a reputation arises. Amotz Zahavi, famous for his work with the altruistic Arabian babbler, suggests that this level of \"social prestige\" will affect which individuals interact with one another and how they behave. \n\nCompetitive altruism has been demonstrated repeatedly in studies with humans. For instance, individuals are more generous when their behaviour is visible to others and altruistic individuals receive more social status and are selectively preferred as collaboration partners and group leaders... Adding insights from sexual selection theory research has also found that men behave more altruistically in the presence of an (attractive) female and altruistic males are selectively preferred as long-term sexual partners.\n\nThe theory of competitive altruism also helps one connect such behavior to the handicap principle. With competitive altruism, cooperation is considered a trait that provides a signaling benefit, and thus is subject to sexual selection. Like a peacock's tail, cooperation persists and is magnified, even though it carries a cost to the individual. Cooperation must be significantly costly to the individual, such that only a limited proportion of the population is fit enough to partake.\n\nRoberts builds on the idea of altruism as a signaling benefit with his \"free gift theory\". Because the recipient gains some benefit from the interaction with the donor, there is an incentive to pay attention to the signal. For example, some male birds will offer food to a potential mate. Such behavior, called courtship feeding, not only benefits the female, who receives a meal without expending any energy, but also conveys the ability of the male to forage. Consequently, the signal is kept true (i.e. it remains a correct reflection on the fitness of the mate).\n\nHowever, the connection between competitive altruism and signaling is not without criticism. Wright raises the point that an altruistic signaling behavior like gift giving would cause a \"flow of fitness from the higher quality individual to the lower quality one\" and reduce the veracity of the signal. To account for this likely trend, Wright stipulates that the altruistic behavior must be directed at a mate or ally. In order for the theory to hold true, the signaling benefit would have to be shown to improve the individual's fitness beyond the benefit gained from the \"investment\" in the partner.\n\n", "id": "17268791", "title": "Competitive altruism"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18398577", "text": "Somatic evolution in cancer\n\nSomatic evolution is the accumulation of mutations and epimutations in the cells of a body during a lifetime, and the effects of those mutations and epimutations on the fitness of those cells. This evolutionary process has first been shown by the studies of Bert Vogelstein in colon cancer. Somatic evolution is important in the process of aging as well as the development of some diseases, including cancer.\n\nCells in pre-malignant and malignant neoplasms (tumors) evolve by natural selection. This accounts for how cancer develops from normal tissue and why it has been difficult to cure. There are three necessary and sufficient conditions for natural selection, all of which are met in a neoplasm:\n\nCells in neoplasms compete for resources, such as oxygen and glucose, as well as space. Thus, a cell that acquires a mutation that increases its fitness will generate more daughter cells than competitor cells that lack that mutation. In this way, a population of mutant cells, called a clone, can expand in the neoplasm. Clonal expansion is the signature of natural selection in cancer.\n\nCancer therapies act as a form of artificial selection, killing sensitive cancer cells, but leaving behind resistant cells. Often the tumor will regrow from those resistant cells, the patient will relapse, and the therapy that had been previously used will no longer kill the cancer cells. This selection for resistance is similar to the repeatedly spraying crops with a pesticide and selecting for resistant pests until the pesticide is no longer effective.\n\nModern descriptions of biological evolution will typically elaborate on major contributing factors to evolution such as the formation of local micro-environments, mutational robustness, molecular degeneracy, and cryptic genetic variation. Many of these contributing factors in evolution have been isolated and described for cancer.\n\nCancer is a classic example of what evolutionary biologists call multilevel selection: at the level of the organism, cancer is usually fatal so there is selection for genes and the organization of tissues that suppress cancer. At the level of the cell, there is selection for increased cell proliferation and survival, such that a mutant cell that acquires one of the hallmarks of cancer (see below), will have a competitive advantage over cells that have not acquired the hallmark. Thus, at the level of the cell there is selection for cancer.\n\nThe earliest ideas about neoplastic evolution come from Boveri who proposed that tumors originated in chromosomal abnormalities passed on to daughter cells. In the decades that followed, cancer was recognized as having a clonal origin associated with chromosomal aberrations.\n\nEarly mathematical modeling of cancer, by Armitage and Doll, set the stage for the future development of the somatic evolutionary theory of cancer. Armitage and Doll explained the cancer incidence data, as a function of age, as a process of the sequential accumulation of somatic mutations (or other rate limiting steps).\n\nAdvances in cytogenetics facilitated discovery of chromosome abnormalities in neoplasms, including the Philadelphia chromosome in chronic myelogenous leukemia and translocations in acute myeloblastic leukemia. Sequences of karyotypes replacing one another in a tumor were observed as it progressed. Researchers hypothesized that cancer evolves in a sequence of chromosomal mutations and selection and that therapy may further select clones.\n\nIn 1971, Knudson published the 2-hit hypothesis for mutation and cancer based on statistical analysis of inherited and sporadic cases of retinoblastoma. He postulated that retinoblastoma developed as a consequence of two mutations; one of which could be inherited or somatic followed by a second somatic mutation. Cytogenetic studies localized the region to the long arm of chromosome 13, and molecular genetic studies demonstrated that tumorigenesis was associated with chromosomal mechanisms, such as mitotic recombination or non-disjunction, that could lead to homozygosity of the mutation. The retinoblastoma gene was the first tumor suppressor gene to be cloned in 1986.\n\nCairns hypothesized a different, but complementary, mechanism of tumor suppression in 1975 based on tissue architecture to protect against selection of variant somatic cells with increased fitness in proliferating epithelial populations, such as the intestine and other epithelial organs. He postulated that this could be accomplished by restricting the number of stem cells for example at the base of intestinal crypts and restraining the opportunities for competition between cells by shedding differentiated intestinal cells into the gut. The essential predictions of this model have been confirmed although mutations in some tumor suppressor genes, including CDKN2A (p16), predispose to clonal expansions that encompass large numbers of crypts in some conditions such as Barrett's esophagus. He also postulated an immortal DNA strand that is discussed at Immortal DNA strand hypothesis.\n\nNowell synthesized the evolutionary view of cancer in 1976 as a process of genetic instability and natural selection. Most of the alterations that occur are deleterious for the cell, and those clones will tend to go extinct, but occasional selectively advantageous mutations arise that lead to clonal expansions. This theory predicts a unique genetic composition in each neoplasm due to the random process of mutations, genetic polymorphisms in the human population, and differences in the selection pressures of the neoplasm's microenvironment. Interventions are predicted to have varying results in different patients. What is more important, the theory predicts the emergence of resistant clones under the selective pressures of therapy. Since 1976, researchers have identified clonal expansions and genetic heterogeneity\nwithin many different types of neoplasms.\n\nThere are multiple levels of genetic heterogeneity associated with cancer, including single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), sequence mutations, Microsatellite shifts and instability, loss of heterozygosity (LOH), Copy number variation (detected both by comparative genomic hybridization (CGH), and array CGH,) and karyotypic variations including chromosome structural aberrations and aneuploidy. Studies of this issue have focused mainly at the gene mutation level, as copy number variation, LOH and specific chromosomal translocations are explained in the context of gene mutation. It is thus necessary to integrate multiple levels of genetic variation in the context of complex system and multilevel selection.\n\nSystem instability is a major contributing factor for genetic heterogeneity. For the majority of cancers, genome instability is reflected in a large frequency of mutations in the whole genome DNA sequence (not just the protein coding regions that are only 1.5% of the genome). In whole genome sequencing of different types of cancers, large numbers of mutations were found in two breast cancers (about 20,000 point mutations), 25 melanomas (9,000 to 333,000 point mutations) and a lung cancer (50,000 point mutations and 54,000 small additions and deletions). Genome instability is also referred to as an enabling characteristic for achieving endpoints of cancer evolution.\nMany of the somatic evolutionary studies have traditionally been focused on clonal expansion, as recurrent types of changes can be traced to illustrate the evolutionary path based on available methods. Recent studies from both direct DNA sequencing and karyotype analysis illustrate the importance of the high level of heterogeneity in somatic evolution. For the formation of solid tumors, there is an involvement of multiple cycles of clonal and non-clonal expansion. Even at the typical clonal expansion phase, there are significant levels of heterogeneity within the cell population, however, most are under-detected when mixed populations of cells are used for molecular analysis. In solid tumors, a majority of gene mutations are not recurrent types, and neither are the karyotypes. These analyses offer an explanation for the findings that there are no common mutations shared by most cancers.\n\nThe state of a cell may be changed epigenetically, in addition to genetic alterations. The best-understood epigenetic alterations in tumors are the silencing or expression of genes by changes in the methylation of CG pairs of nucleotides in the promoter regions of the genes. These methylation patterns are copied to the new chromosomes when cells replicate their genomes and so methylation alterations are heritable and subject to natural selection. Methylation changes are thought to occur more frequently than mutations in the DNA, and so may account for many of the changes during neoplastic progression (the process by which normal tissue becomes cancerous), in particular in the early stages. For instance, when loss of expression of the DNA repair protein MGMT occurs in a colon cancer, it is caused by a mutation only about 4% of the time, while in most cases the loss is due to methylation of its promoter region. Similarly, when loss of expression of the DNA repair protein PMS2 occurs in colon cancer, it is caused by a mutation about 5% of the time, while in most cases loss of expression is due to methylation of the promoter of its pairing partner MLH1 (PMS2 is unstable in the absence of MLH1). Epigenetic changes in progression interact with genetic changes. For example, epigenetic silencing of genes responsible for the repair of mispairs or damages in the DNA (e.g. MLH1 or MSH2) results in an increase of genetic mutations.\n\nDeficiency of DNA repair proteins PMS2, MLH1, MSH2, MSH3, MSH6 or BRCA2 can cause up to 100-fold increases in mutation frequency Epigenetic deficiencies in DNA repair gene protein expression have been found in many cancers, though not all deficiencies have been evaluated in all cancers. Epigeneticically deficient DNA repair proteins include BRCA1, WRN, MGMT, MLH1, MSH2, ERCC1, PMS2, XPF, P53, PCNA and OGG1, and these are found to be deficient at frequencies of 13% to 100% in different cancers (Also see Frequencies of epimutations in DNA repair genes.)\n\nIn addition to well studied epigenetic promoter methylation, more recently there have been substantial findings of epigenetic alterations in cancer due to changes in histone and chromatin architecture and alterations in the expression of microRNAs (microRNAs either cause degradation of messenger RNAs or block their translation) For instance, hypomethylation of the promoter for microRNA miR-155 increases expression of miR-155, and this increased miR-155 targets DNA repair genes MLH1, MSH2 and MSH6, causing each of them to have reduced expression.\n\nIn cancers, loss of expression of genes occurs about 10 times more frequently by transcription silencing (caused by somatically heritable promoter hypermethylation of CpG islands) than by mutations. As Vogelstein et al. point out, in a colorectal cancer there are usually about 3 to 6 driver mutations and 33 to 66 hitchhiker or passenger mutations. In contrast, in colon tumors compared to adjacent normal-appearing colonic mucosa, there are about 600 to 800 somatically heritable heavily methylated CpG islands in promoters of genes in the tumors while these CpG islands are not methylated in the adjacent mucosa.\n\nMethylation of the cytosine of CpG dinucleotides is a somatically heritable and conserved regulatory mark that is generally associated with transcriptional repression. CpG islands keep their overall un-methylated state (or methylated state) extremely stably through multiple cell generations.\n\nOne common feature of neoplastic progression is the expansion of a clone with a genetic or epigenetic alteration. This may be a matter of chance, but is more likely due to the expanding clone having a competitive advantage (either a reproductive or survival advantage) over other cells in the tissue. Since clones often have many genetic and epigenetic alterations in their genomes, it is often not clear which of those alterations cause a reproductive or survival advantage and which other alterations are simply hitchhikers or passenger mutations (see Glossary below) on the clonal expansion.\n\nClonal expansions are most often associated with the loss of the p53 (TP53) or p16 (CDKN2A/INK4a) tumor suppressor genes. In lung cancer, a clone with a p53 mutation was observed to have spread over the surface of one entire lung and into the other lung. In bladder cancer, clones with loss of p16 were observed to have spread over the entire surface of the bladder.\nLikewise, large expansions of clones with loss of p16 have been observed in the oral cavity and in Barrett's esophagus.\nClonal expansions associated with inactivation of p53 have also appear in skin, Barrett's esophagus, brain, and kidney.\nFurther clonal expansions have been observed in the stomach, bladder, colon, lung, hematopoietic (blood) cells, and prostate.\n\nThese clonal expansions are important for at least two reasons. First, they generate a large target population of mutant cells and so increase the probability that the multiple mutations necessary to cause cancer will be acquired within that clone. Second, in at least one case, the size of the clone with loss of p53 has been associated with an increased risk of a pre-malignant tumor becoming cancerous. It is thought that the process of developing cancer involves successive waves of clonal expansions within the tumor.\n\nThe term \"field cancerization\" was first used in 1953 to describe an area or \"field\" of epithelium that has been preconditioned by (at that time) largely unknown processes so as to predispose it towards development of cancer. Since then, the terms \"field cancerization\" and \"field defect\" have been used to describe pre-malignant tissue in which new cancers are likely to arise. Field defects, for example, have been identified in most of the major areas subject to tumorigenesis in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Cancers of the GI tract that are shown to be due, to some extent, to field defects include head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), oropharyngeal/laryngeal cancer, esophageal adenocarcinoma and esophageal squamous-cell carcinoma, gastric cancer, bile duct cancer, pancreatic cancer, small intestine cancer and colon cancer.\n\nIn the colon, a field defect probably arises by natural selection of a mutant or epigenetically altered cell among the stem cells at the base of one of the intestinal crypts on the inside surface of the colon. A mutant or epigenetically altered stem cell, if it has a selective advantage, could replace the other nearby stem cells by natural selection. This can cause a patch of abnormal tissue, or field defect. The figure in this section includes a photo of a freshly resected and lengthwise-opened segment of the colon that may represent a large field defect in which there is a colon cancer and four polyps. The four polyps, in addition to the cancer, may represent sub-clones with proliferative advantages.\n\nThe sequence of events giving rise to this possible field defect are indicated below the photo. The schematic diagram shows a large area in yellow indicating a large patch of mutant or epigenetically altered cells that formed by clonal expansion of an initial cell based on a selective advantage. Within this first large patch, a second such mutation or epigenetic alteration may have occurred so that a given stem cell acquired an additional selective advantage compared to the other stem cells within the patch, and this altered stem cell expanded clonally forming a secondary patch, or sub-clone, within the original patch. This is indicated in the diagram by four smaller patches of different colors within the large yellow original area. Within these new patches (sub-clones), the process may have been repeated multiple times, indicated by the still smaller patches within the four secondary patches (with still different colors in the diagram) which clonally expanded, until a stem cell arose that generated either small polyps (which may be benign neoplasms) or else a malignant neoplasm (cancer). These neoplasms are also indicated, in the diagram below the photo, by 4 small tan circles (polyps) and a larger red area (cancer). The cancer in the photo occurred in the cecal area of the colon, where the colon joins the small intestine (labeled) and where the appendix occurs (labeled). The fat in the photo is external to the outer wall of the colon. In the segment of colon shown here, the colon was cut open lengthwise to expose the inner surface of the colon and to display the cancer and polyps occurring within the inner epithelial lining of the colon.\n\nPhylogenetics may be applied to cells in tumors to reveal the evolutionary relationships between cells, just as it is used to reveal evolutionary relationships between organisms and species. Shibata, Tavare and colleagues have exploited this to estimate the time between the initiation of a tumor and its detection in the clinic. Louhelainen \"et al.\" have used parsimony to reconstruct the relationships between biopsy samples based on loss of heterozygosity. Phylogenetic trees should not be confused with oncogenetic trees, which represent the common sequences of genetic events during neoplastic progression and do not represent the relationships of common ancestry that are essential to a phylogeny. For an up-to-date review in this field, see Bast 2012.\n\nAn adaptive landscape is a hypothetical topological landscape upon which evolution is envisioned to take place. It is similar to Wright's fitness landscape in which the location of each point represents the genotype of an organism and the altitude represents the fitness of that organism in the current environment. However, unlike Wright's rigid landscape, the adaptive landscape is pliable. It readily changes shape with changes in population densities and survival/reproductive strategies used within and among the various species.\n\nWright's shifting balance theory of evolution combines genetic drift (random sampling error in the transmission of genes) and natural selection to explain how multiple peaks on a fitness landscape could be occupied or how a population can achieve a higher peak on this landscape. This theory, based on the assumption of density-dependent selection as the principal forms of selection, results in a fitness landscape that is relatively rigid. A rigid landscape is one that does not change in response to even large changes in the position and composition of strategies along the landscape.\n\nIn contrast to the fitness landscape, the adaptive landscape is constructed assuming that both density and frequency-dependent selection is involved (selection is frequency-dependant when the fitness of a species depends not only on that species strategy but also on the strategy of all other species). As such, the shape of the adaptive landscape can change drastically in response to even small changes in strategies and densities.\n\nThe flexibility of adaptive landscapes provide several ways for natural selection to cross valleys and occupy multiple peaks without having to make large changes in their strategies. Within the context of differential or difference equation models for population dynamics, an adaptive landscape may actually be constructed using a fitness generating function. If a given species is able to evolve, it will, over time, \"climb\" the adaptive landscape toward a fitness peak through gradual changes in its mean phenotype according to a strategy dynamic that involves the slope of the adaptive landscape. Because the adaptive landscape is not rigid and can change shape during the evolutionary process, it is possible that a species may be driven to maximum, minimum, or saddle point on the adaptive landscape. A population at a global maximum on the adaptive landscape corresponds an evolutionarily stable strategy (ESS) and will become dominant, driving all others toward extinction. Populations at a minimum or saddle point are not resistant to invasion, so that the introduction of a slightly different mutant strain may continue the evolutionary process toward unoccupied local maxima.\n\nThe adaptive landscape provides a useful tool for studying somatic evolution as it can describe the process of how a mutant cell evolves from a small tumor to an invasive cancer. Understanding this process in terms of the adaptive landscape may lead to the control of cancer through external manipulation of the shape of the landscape.\n\nIn their landmark paper, \"The Hallmarks of Cancer\", Hanahan and Weinberg suggest that cancer can be described by a small number of underlying principles, despite the complexities of the disease. The authors describe how tumor progression proceeds via a process analogous to Darwinian evolution, where each genetic change confers a growth advantage to the cell. These genetic changes can be grouped into six \"hallmarks\", which drive a population of normal cells to become a cancer. The six hallmarks are: \nGenetic instability is defined as an \"enabling characteristic\" that facilitates the acquisition of other mutations due to defects in DNA repair.\n\nThe hallmark \"self-sufficiency in growth signals\" describes the observation that tumor cells produce many of their own growth signals and thereby no longer rely on proliferation signals from the micro-environment. Normal cells are maintained in a nondividing state by antigrowth signals, which cancer cells learn to evade through genetic changes producing \"insensitivity to antigrowth signals\". A normal cell initiates programmed cell death (apoptosis) in response to signals such as DNA damage, oncogene overexpression, and survival factor insufficiency, but a cancer cell learns to \"evade apoptosis\", leading to the accumulation of aberrant cells. Most mammalian cells can replicate a limited number of times due to progressive shortening of telomeres; virtually all malignant cancer cells gain an ability to maintain their telomeres, conferring \"limitless replicative potential\". As cells cannot survive at distances of more than 100 μm from a blood supply, cancer cells must initiate the formation of new blood vessels to support their growth via the process of \"sustained angiogenesis\". During the development of most cancers, primary tumor cells acquire the ability to undergo \"invasion and metastasis\" whereby they migrate into the surrounding tissue and travel to distant sites in the body, forming secondary tumors.\n\nThe pathways that cells take toward becoming malignant cancers are variable, and the order in which the hallmarks are acquired can vary from tumor to tumor. The early genetic events in tumorigenesis are difficult to measure clinically, but can be simulated according to known biology. Macroscopic tumors are now beginning to be described in terms of their underlying genetic changes, providing additional data to refine the framework described in The Hallmarks of Cancer.\n\nThe theory about the monoclonal origin of cancer states that, in general, neoplasms arise from a single cell of origin. While it is possible that certain carcinogens may mutate more than one cell at once, the tumor mass usually represents progeny of a single cell, or very few cells. A series of mutations is required in the process of carcinogenesis for a cell to transition from being normal to pre-malignant and then to a cancer cell. The mutated genes usually belong to classes of caretaker, gatekeeper, landscaper or several other genes. Mutation ultimately leads to acquisition of the ten hallmarks of cancer.\n\nThe first malignant cell, that gives rise to the tumor, is often labeled a cancer stem cell.\n\nThe cancer stem-cell hypothesis relies on the fact that a lot of tumors are heterogeneous – the cells in the tumor vary by phenotype and functions. Current research shows that in many cancers there is apparent hierarchy among cells. in general, there is a small population of cells in the tumor – about 0.2%–1% – that exhibits stem cell-like properties. These cells have the ability to give rise to a variety of cells in tumor tissue, self-renew indefinitely, and upon transfer can form new tumors. According to the hypothesis, cancer stem cells are the only cells capable of tumorigenesis – initiation of a new tumor. Cancer stem cell hypothesis might explain such phenomena as metastasis and remission.\n\nThe monoclonal model of cancer and the cancer stem-cell model are not mutually exclusive. Cancer stem cell arises by clonal evolution as a result of selection for the cell with the highest fitness in the neoplasm. This way, the heterogeneous nature of neoplasm can be explained by two processes – clonal evolution, or the hierarchical differentiation of cells, regulated by cancer stem cells. All cancers arise as a result of somatic evolution, but only some of them fit the cancer stem cell hypothesis. The evolutionary processes do not cease when a population of cancer stem cells arises in a tumor. Cancer treatment drugs pose a strong selective force on all types of cells in tumors, including cancer stem cells, which would be forced to evolve resistance to the treatment. It is interesting to note that cancer stem cells do not always have to have the highest resistance among the cells in the tumor to survive chemotherapy and re-emerge afterwards. The surviving cells might be in a special microenvironment, which protects them from adverse effects of treatment.\n\nIt is currently unclear as to whether cancer stem cells arise from adult stem cell transformation, a maturation arrest of progenitor cells, or as a result of dedifferentiation of mature cells.\n\nTherapeutic resistance has been observed in virtually every form of therapy, from the beginning of cancer therapy. In most cases, therapies appear to select for mutations in the genes or pathways targeted by the drug.\n\nSome of the first evidence for a genetic basis of acquired therapeutic resistance came from studies of methotrexate. Methotrexate inhibits the dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) gene. However, methotrexate therapy appears to select for cells with extra copies (amplification) of DHFR, which are resistant to methotrexate. This was seen in both cell culture and samples from tumors in patients that had been treated with methotrexate.\n\nA common cytotoxic chemotherapy used in a variety of cancers, 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), targets the TYMS pathway and resistance can evolve through the evolution of extra copies of TYMS, thereby diluting the drug's effect.\n\nIn the case of Gleevec (Imatinib), which targets the BCR-ABL fusion gene in chronic myeloid leukemia, resistance often develops through a mutation that changes the shape of the binding site of the drug. Sequential application of drugs can lead to the sequential evolution of resistance mutations to each drug in turn.\n\nGleevec is not as selective as was originally thought. It turns out that it targets other tyrosine kinase genes and can be used to control gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) that are driven by mutations in c-KIT. However, patients with GIST sometimes relapse with additional mutations in c-KIT that make the cancer cells resistant to Gleevec.\n\nGefitinib(Iressa) and Erlotinib (Tarceva) are epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors used for non-small cell lung cancer patients whose tumors have somatic mutations in EGFR. However, most patients' tumors eventually become resistant to these drugs. Two major mechanisms of acquired resistance have been discovered in patients who have developed clinical resistance to Gefitinib or Erlotinib: point mutations in the EGFR gene targeted by the drugs, and amplification of MET, another receptor tyrosine kinase, which can bypass EGFR to activate downstream signaling in the cell. In an initial study, 22% of tumors with acquired resistance to Gefitinib or Erlotinib had MET amplification. To address these issues, clinical trials are currently assessing irreversible EGFR inhibitors (which inihibit growth even in cell lines with mutations in EGFR), the combination of EGFR and MET kinase inhibitors, and Hsp90 inihibitors (EGFR and MET both require Hsp90 proteins to fold properly). In addition, taking repeated tumor biopsies from patients as they develop resistance to these drugs would help to understand the tumor dynamics.\n\nSelective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) are a commonly used adjuvant therapy in estrogen-receptor positive (ERα+) breast cancer and a preventive treatment for women at high risk of the disease. There are several possible mechanisms of SERM resistance, though the relative clinical importance of each is debated. These include:\n\nMost prostate cancers derive from cells that are stimulated to proliferate by androgens. Most prostate cancer therapies are therefore based on removing or blocking androgens. Mutations in the androgen receptor (AR) have been observed in anti-androgen resistant prostate cancer that makes the AR hypersensitive to the low levels of androgens that remain after therapy. Likewise, extra copies of the AR gene (amplification) have been observed in anti-androgen resistant prostate cancer. These additional copies of the gene are thought to make the cell hypersensitive to low levels of androgens and so allow them to proliferate under anti-androgen therapy.\n\nResistance to radiotherapy is also commonly observed. However, to date, comparisons of malignant tissue before and after radiotherapy have not been done to identify genetic and epigenetic changes selected by exposure to radiation. In gliomas, a form of brain cancer, radiation therapy appears to select for stem cells, though it is unclear if the tumor returns to the pre-therapy proportion of cancer stem cells after therapy or if radiotherapy selects for an alteration that keeps the glioma cells in the stem cell state.\n\nCancer drugs and therapies commonly used today are evolutionary inert and represent a strong selection force, which leads to drug resistance. A possible way to avoid that is to use a treatment agent that would co-evolve alongside cancer cells.\n\nAnoxic bacteria could be used as competitors or predators in hypoxic environments within tumors. Scientists have been interested in the idea of using anoxic bacteria for over 150 years, but until recently there has been little progress in that field. According to Jain and Forbes, several requirements have to be met by the cells to qualify as efficient anticancer bacterium: \n1.The bacterium cannot be toxic to the host\n2.Its population should be restricted to the tumor mass\n3.It should be able to disperse evenly throughout the neoplasm\n4.At the end of the treatment bacterium should be easily eliminated from the host\n5.It should not be causing severe immune response\n6.It should be able to cause tumor cells death through competition for nutrients. \nIn the process of the treatment, cancer cells are most likely to evolve some form of resistance to the bacterial treatment. However, being a living organism, bacteria would coevolve with tumor cells, potentially eliminating the possibility of resistance.\n\nSince bacteria prefer an anoxic environment, they are not efficient at eliminating cells on the periphery of the tumor, where oxygen supply is efficient. A combination of bacterial treatment with chemical drugs will increase chances of destroying the tumor.\n\nOncolytic viruses are engineered to infect cancerous cells. Limitations of that method include immune response to the virus and the possibility of the virus evolving into a pathogen.\n\nBy manipulating the tumor environment, it is possible to create favorable conditions for the cells with least resistance to chemotherapy drugs to become more fit and outcompete the rest of the population. The chemotherapy, administered directly after, should wipe out the predominant tumor cells.\n\nMapping between common terms from cancer biology and evolutionary biology\n\n\n\n", "id": "18398577", "title": "Somatic evolution in cancer"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18349854", "text": "Darwinian Demon\n\nA Darwinian Demon is a hypothetical organism which can maximize all aspects of fitness simultaneously and would exist if the evolution of species was entirely unconstrained. It is named for Charles Darwin. Such organisms would reproduce directly after being born, produce infinitely many offspring, and live indefinitely. Even though no such organisms exist, biologists use Darwinian Demons in thought experiments to understand different life history strategies among different organisms.\n\n\n", "id": "18349854", "title": "Darwinian Demon"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18500477", "text": "Intergradation\n\nIn zoology, intergradation is the way in which two distinct subspecies are connected via areas where populations are found that have the characteristics of both. There are two types of intergradation:\n\nThis occurs in cases where two subspecies are connected via one or more intermediate populations, each of which is in turn intermediate to its adjacent populations and exhibits more or less the same amount of variability as any other population within the species. Adjacent populations and subspecies are subject to cline intergradation, and in these situations it is usually taken for granted that the clines are causally related (by natural selection) to environmental gradients.\n\nWhen contact between a geographically isolated subspecies is reestablished with the main body of the species or with another isolate subspecies, interbreeding takes place as long as the isolate has not yet evolved an effective set of isolating mechanisms. Consequently, a relatively distinct zone or belt of hybridization will develop depending on the degree of genetic and phenotypic difference that was achieved by the previously isolated subspecies.\n\n", "id": "18500477", "title": "Intergradation"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17998857", "text": "E. coli long-term evolution experiment\n\nThe \"E. coli\" long-term evolution experiment (LTEE) is an ongoing study in experimental evolution led by Richard Lenski that has been tracking genetic changes in 12 initially identical populations of asexual \"Escherichia coli\" bacteria since 24 February 1988. The populations reached the milestone of 50,000 generations and 66,000 in November 2016. Lenski performed the 10,000th transfer of the experiment on March 13, 2017.\n\nOver the course of the experiment, Lenski and his colleagues have reported a wide array of phenotypic and genotypic changes in the evolving populations. These have included changes that have occurred in all 12 populations and others that have only appeared in one or a few populations. For example, all 12 populations showed a similar pattern of rapid improvement in fitness that decelerated over time, faster growth rates, and increased cell size. Half of the populations have evolved defects in DNA repair that have caused mutator phenotypes marked by elevated mutation rates. The most striking adaptation reported so far is the evolution of aerobic growth on citrate, which is unusual in \"E. coli\", in one population at some point between generations 31,000 and 31,500.\n\nThe long-term evolution experiment was designed as an open-ended means of empirical examination of central features of evolution. The experiment was begun with three principal goals:\nAs the experiment has continued, its scope has grown as new questions in evolutionary biology have arisen that it can be used to address, as the populations' evolution has presented new phenomena to study, and as technology and methodological techniques have advanced.\n\nThe use of \"E. coli\" as the experimental organism has allowed many generations and large populations to be studied in a relatively short period of time. Moreover, due to the long use of \"E .coli\" as a principle model organism in molecular biology, a wide array of tools, protocols, and procedures were available for studying changes at the genetic, phenotypic, and physiological levels. The bacteria can also be frozen and preserved while remaining viable. This has permitted the creation of what Lenski describes as a \"frozen fossil record\" of samples of evolving populations that can be revived at any time. This frozen fossil record allows populations to be restarted in cases of contamination or other disruption in the experiment, and permits the isolation and comparison of living exemplars of ancestral and evolved clones. Lenski chose an \"E. coli\" strain that reproduces only asexually, lacks any plasmids that could permit bacterial conjugation, and has no viable prophage. As a consequence, evolution in the experiment occurs only by the core evolutionary processes of mutation, genetic drift, and natural selection. This strict asexuality also means that genetic markers persist in lineages and clades by common descent, but cannot otherwise spread in the populations.\n\nLenski chose to carry out the experiment with the bacteria grown in a glucose-limited minimal medium called DM25, which was initially developed by Bernard Davis for use in isolating auxotrophic mutants of \"E. coli\" using penicillin as a selective agent. DM25 is supplemented with a low concentration of glucose. Lenski chose this concentration to simplify analysis of the populations' evolution by reducing clonal interference, in which multiple versions of alleles are competing in an evolving population, while also reducing the possibility of the evolution of ecological interactions. This concentration of glucose used supports a maximum population of 500 million cells of the ancestor in a 10 mL culture, though the maximum now varies among the evolved populations. DM25 also contains a large amount of citrate (about 11 times the concentration of glucose), which was originally included by Davis because it improved the killing efficiency of penicillin during his experiments, though it is now known to aid in \"E. coli\"'s acquisition of iron from the medium.\n\nThe 12 populations are maintained in a incubator in Lenski's laboratory at Michigan State University. Each day, 1% of each population is transferred to a flask of fresh DM25 growth medium. The dilution means that each population experiences 6.64 generations, or doublings, each day. Large, representative samples of each population are frozen with glycerol as a cryoprotectant at 500-generation (75-day) intervals. The bacteria in these samples remain viable, and can be revived at any time. This collection of samples is referred to as the \"frozen fossil record\", and provides a history of the evolution of each population through the entire experiment. The populations are also regularly screened for changes in mean fitness, and supplemental experiments are regularly performed to study interesting developments in the populations. , the \"E. coli\" populations have been under study for over 64,500 generations, and are thought to have undergone enough spontaneous mutations that every possible single point mutation in the \"E. coli\" genome has occurred multiple times.\n\nThe strain of \"E. coli\" Lenski chose to use in the long-term evolution experiment was derived from \"strain Bc251\", as described in a 1966 paper by Seymour Lederberg, via Bruce Levin, who had used it in a bacterial ecology experiment in 1972. The defining genetics traits of this strain were: T6, Str, rm, Ara (unable to grow on arabinose). Lenski designated the original founding strain as REL606. Before the beginning of the experiment, Lenski isolated an Ara variant of the strain in which a point mutation in the \"ara\" operon had restored growth on arabinose, which he designated as strain REL607. When beginning the long-term evolution experiment, Lenski founded six populations with six individual Ara colonies of REL606. These populations are referred to as Ara-1 through Ara-6. Lenski also founded six more populations from six individual Ara colonies of REL607. These are referred to as populations Ara+1 through Ara+6. The marker differences permit strains to be differentiated on Tetrazolium Arabinose plates, on which Ara colonies appear red, while Ara colonies appear white to pink. Over the course of the experiment, each population has accumulated a large number of distinct mutations, which permit further means of identifying strains by their population of origin.\n\nMuch analysis of the experiment has dealt with how the fitness of the populations relative to their ancestral strain has changed. All populations showed a pattern of rapid increase in relative fitness during early generations, with this increase decelerating over time. By 20,000 generations the populations grew approximately 70% faster than the ancestral strain. This increase and deceleration in increase has continued in subsequent generations. A 2013 study by Wiser et al. reported ongoing improvement at 50,000 generations relative to samples isolated at 40,000 generations. They found that the fitness increase fit to a power law model much better than the hyperbolic models that had been used earlier. As a power law model describes an ever-slowing increase that has no upper limit, while a hyperbolic model implies a hard limit, the work suggested that the increase would continue without bound as progressively lower benefit mutations were fixed in the populations. Further work published in 2015 reported the results of over 1100 new fitness assays that examined fitness changes through 60,000 generations. The data once again fit the proposed power law model, and, indeed, fit within predictions of the model from earlier data. These results suggest that, contrary to previous thinking, adaptation and adaptive divergence can potentially increase indefinitely, even in a constant environment.\n\nOf the 12 populations, six have so far been reported to have developed defects in their ability to repair DNA, greatly increasing the rate of mutation in those strains. Although the bacteria in each population are thought to have generated hundreds of millions of mutations over the first 20,000 generations, Lenski has estimated that within this time frame, only 10 to 20 beneficial mutations achieved fixation in each population, with fewer than 100 total point mutations (including neutral mutations) reaching fixation in each population. In 2009, Barrick et al. reported the results of genome sequences from multiple time points in population Ara-1. They found that, unlike the declining rate of fitness improvement, mutation accumulation was linear and clock like, even though several lines of evidence suggested that much of the accumulation was beneficial, rather than neutral.\n\nAll twelve of the experimental populations show an increase in cell size concurrent with a decline in maximum population density, and in many of the populations, a more rounded cell shape. This change was partly the result of a mutation that changed the expression of a gene for a penicillin-binding protein, which allowed the mutant bacteria to outcompete ancestral bacteria under the conditions in the long-term evolution experiment. However, although this mutation increased fitness under these conditions, it also increased the bacteria's sensitivity to osmotic stress and decreased their ability to survive long periods in stationary phase cultures.\n\nOver the course of the experiment, the populations have evolved to specialize on the glucose resource on which they grow. This was first described in 2000, when Cooper and Lenski demonstrated that all populations had experienced decay of unused metabolic functions after 20,000 generations, restricting the range of substances on which the bacteria could grow. Their analysis suggested that this decay was due to antagonistic pleiotropy, in which mutations that improved ability to grow on glucose had reduced or eliminated the ability to grow on others substances. A later study by Leiby and Marx that used more advanced techniques showed that much of the decay Cooper and Lenski had identified were experimental artifacts, that loss of unused functions was not as extensive as first thought, and that some unused functions had improved. Moreover, they concluded that the metabolic losses were not due to antagonistic pleiotropy, but the neutral accumulation of mutations in unused portions of the genome, suggesting that adaptation to a simple environment might not necessarily lead to specialization.\n\nTwo distinct variants, S and L, were identified in the population designated Ara-2 at 18,000 generations based on their formation of small and large colonies, respectively. Clones of the S and L types could co-exist stably in co-culture with each other, indicating they occupied distinct niches in the population. This was verified by the finding that the L type had an advantage during growth on glucose, but that S had an advantage during stationary phase, after glucose had run out. The two types were found to have initially evolved prior to 6,000 generations, and then co-existed thereafter. Phylogenetic analysis of clones of the two types isolated from different generations demonstrated that the S and L types belonged to distinct, co-existing lineages in the population, and might be undergoing incipient speciation.\n\n\"E. coli\" is normally unable to grow aerobically on citrate due to the inability to express a citrate transporter when oxygen is present. However, \"E. coli\" has a complete citric acid cycle, and therefore metabolizes citrate as an intermediate during aerobic growth on other substances, including glucose. Most \"E. coli\" can grow anaerobically on citrate via fermentation, if a co-substrate such as glucose is available to provide reducing power. The anaerobic growth is possible due to the expression of a transmembrane citrate-succinate antiporter gene, \"citT\", which was first identified in 1998. This gene is co-regulated with other genes involved in citrate fermentation found on the \"cit\" operon, which is turned on only when oxygen is absent.\n\nThe inability to grow aerobically on citrate, referred to as a Cit phenotype, is considered a defining characteristic of \"E. coli\" as a species, and one that has been a valuable means of differentiating \"E. coli\" from pathogenic \"Salmonella\". While Cit strains of \"E. coli\" have been isolated from environmental and agricultural samples, in every such case, the trait was found to be due to the presence of a plasmid containing a foreign citrate transporter. A single, spontaneous Cit mutant of \"E. coli\" was reported by Hall in 1982. This mutant had been isolated during prolonged selection for growth on another novel substance in a growth broth that also contained citrate. Hall's genetic analysis indicated the underlying mutation was complex, but he was ultimately unable to identify the precise changes or genes involved, leading him to hypothesize activation of a cryptic transporter gene. The genome regions to which Hall was able to narrow down the locations of the changes do not correspond to the known location of the \"citT\" gene identified 16 years later, nor did the physiological characteristics in transport assays of Hall's Cit mutants match those to be expected for aerobic expression of the CitT transporter.\n\nIn 2008, Lenski's team, led by Zachary D. Blount, reported that the ability to grow aerobically on citrate had evolved in one population. Around generation 33,127, a dramatic increase in turbidity was observed in the population designated Ara-3. They found that the population contained clones that were able to grow aerobically on citrate (Cit). This metabolic capacity permitted the population to grow several-fold larger than it had previously, due to the large amount of citrate present in the medium. Examination of frozen fossil samples of the populations showed that Cit+ clones could be isolated as early as 31,500 generations. The Cit variants in the population were found to possess a number of genetic markers unique to the Ara-3 population, which excluded the possibility that they were contaminants, rather than spontaneous mutants. In a series of experiments that \"replayed\" the tape of Ara-3 evolution from Cit clones isolated from samples frozen at various time points in the population's history, they demonstrated that the ability to grow aerobically on citrate was more likely to re-evolve in a subset of genetically pure, evolved clones. In these experiments, they observed 19 new, independent instances of Cit re-evolution, but only when starting from clones isolated from after generation 20,000. Fluctuation tests showed that clones from this generation and later displayed a rate of mutation to the Cit trait was significantly higher than the ancestral rate. Even in these later clones, the rate of mutation to Cit was on the order of one occurrence per trillion cell divisions.\n\nLenski and his colleagues concluded that the evolution of the Cit function in this one population arose due to one or more earlier, possibly nonadaptive, \"potentiating\" mutations that increased the rate of mutation to an accessible level. The data suggested that citrate usage involved at least two mutations subsequent to these \"potentiating\" mutations. More generally, the authors suggest these results indicate, following the argument of Stephen Jay Gould, \"that historical contingency can have a profound and lasting impact\" on the course of evolution. These findings have come to be considered a significant instance of the impact of historical contingency on evolution.\n\nIn 2012, Lenski and his team reported the results of a genomic analysis of the Cit trait that shed light on the genetic basis and evolutionary history of the trait. The researchers had sequenced the entire genomes of twenty-nine clones isolated from various time points in the Ara-3 population's history. They used these sequences to reconstruct the phylogenetic history of the population, which showed that the population had diversified into three clades by 20,000 generations. The Cit variants had evolved in one of these, which they called Clade 3. Clones that had been found to be potentiated in earlier research were distributed among all three clades, but were over-represented in Clade 3. This led the researchers to conclude that there had been at least two potentiating mutations involved in Cit evolution.\n\nThe researchers also found that all Cit clones had mutations in which 2933 base pair segment of DNA was duplicated or amplified. The duplicated segment contained the gene for the citrate transporter protein used in anaerobic growth on citrate, \"citT\". The duplication is tandem, and resulted in copies that were head-to-tail with respect to each other. This new configuration placed a copy of the previously silent, unexpressed \"citT\" under the control of the adjacent \"rnk\" gene's promoter, which directs expression when oxygen is present. This new \"rnk-citT\" module produced a novel regulatory pattern for \"citT\", activating expression of the citrate transporter when oxygen was present, and thereby enabled aerobic growth on citrate.\n\nMovement of this \"rnk-citT\" module into the genome of a potentiated Cit clone was shown to be sufficient to produce a Cit phenotype. However, the initial Cit phenotype conferred by the duplication was very weak, and only granted a ~1% fitness benefit. The researchers found that the number of copies of the \"rnk-citT\" module had to be increased to strengthen the Cit trait sufficiently to permit the bacteria to grow well on the citrate. Further mutations after the Cit bacteria became dominant in the population continued to accumulate improved growth on citrate.\n\nThe researchers concluded that the evolution of the Cit trait occurred in three distinct phases in which mutations accumulated that increased the rate of mutation to Cit, the trait itself appeared in a weak form, and, finally, the trait was improved by later mutations. Blount et al. suggested that this pattern might be typical of how novel traits in general evolve, and proposed a three-step model of evolutionary innovation:\nThis model has seen acceptance in evolutionary biology. In 2015 paleontologist Douglas Erwin suggested a modification to a four-step model to better reflect a possible distinction between evolutionary novelty and evolutionary innovation, and to highlight the importance of environmental conditions: potentiation, generation of novel phenotypes (actualization), adaptive refinement, and exploitation (conversion of a novelty to an innovation as it becomes important for the ecological establishment of possessing organisms).\n\nIn 2014, a research team led by Eric Quandt in the lab of Jeffrey Barrick at the University of Texas at Austin described the application of a new technique called Recursive Genomewide Recombination and Sequencing (REGRES) to identify potentiating mutations among the 70 present in the Ara-3 lineage that evolved Cit. This method used multiple rounds of a process in which F plasmid based conjugation between a 33,000 generation Cit clone, CZB154, and the Cit founding clone of the LTEE to purge mutations not required for either manifestation of a weak or strong form of the Cit trait, which they refer to as Cit. They found that the \"rnk-citT\" module responsible for the phenotypic switch to Cit+ was sufficient to produce a weak Cit phenotype in the ancestor. They also identified a mutation that had occurred in the lineage leading to CZB154 after the initial evolution of Cit that conferred a strong, Cit phenotype in the ancestor absent any mutation but the \"rnk-citT\" module. This mutation, found in the regulatory region of a gene called \"dctA\", caused a massive increase in the expression of the DctA transporter, which functions to import C-dicarboxylates into the cell. This increased DctA expression, they found, permitted Cit cells to re-uptake succinate, malate, and fumarate released into the medium by the CitT transporter during import of citrate. They identified a similar mutation in Cit clones in the Ara-3 population that increased DctA expression by restoring function to a gene that regulates it, \"dcuS\", that had been deactivated in the ancestral clone. Quandt et al. concluded that the \"dctA\" mutation was not involved in potentiation, but refinement. This led them to suggest that evolution of Cit in the Ara-3 population might have been contingent upon a genetic background and population-specific ecology that permitted the early, weak Cit variants to persist in the population long enough for refining mutations to arise and render growth on citrate strong enough to provide a significant fitness benefit.\n\nQuandt and colleagues later published findings definitively identifying a mutation that did potentiate Cit evolution. This mutation was in the \"gltA\" gene, which encodes citrate synthase, an enzyme involved in the flow of carbon into the citric acid cycle. It had the effect of increasing citrate synthase activity, and they showed that it permitted improved growth on acetate. Moreover, with the \"gltA\" mutation, the \"rnk-citT\" module that causes the Cit trait has a neutral-to-slightly beneficial fitness effect, while, without it, the module was strongly detrimental. The \"gltA\" mutation therefore seems to have permitted early, weak Cit variants to persist in the population until later refining mutations could occur, consistent with their earlier conclusions. After a strong Cit phenotype evolved, the increased citrate synthase activity became detrimental. The researchers found that later mutations in \"gltA\" countered the first mutation, reducing citrate synthase activity, and further improving growth on citrate. They concluded that the series of mutation in \"gltA\" first potentiated, and then refined growth on citrate. They also suggested that the lineage in which Cit arose might have occupied a niche in Ara-3 based on growth on acetate, and that the potentiating mutations that led to evolution of Cit in Ara-3 were originally adaptive for acetate use.\n\nA small subpopulation of Cit cells unable to grow on citrate, and belonging to a separate clade persisted in the population after the Cit cells became dominant. Early findings showed that this diversity was partly due to the Cit cells being better at growing on the glucose in the medium. Turner et al. later found that another factor behind the coexistence was that the Cit cells evolved the ability to cross feed on the Cit majority. They showed that the Cit cells release succinate, malate, and fumarate during growth on citrate, as the CitT transporter pumps these substances out of the cell while pumping citrate into the cell. The Cit cells had rapidly evolved the ability to grow on these substances due to a mutation that restored expression of an appropriate transporter protein that was silent in the ancestor.\n\nThe Cit subpopulation eventually went extinct in the population between 43,500 and 44,000 generations. This extinction was shown to not be due to the Cit majority evolving to be able to invade the niche occupied by the Cit minority. Indeed, Cit clones could invade Cit populations from after the extinction event. Moreover, in an experiment in which they restarted twenty replicates of the Ara-3 population from the sample frozen 500 generations before the extinction, Turner et al. found that the Cit subpopulation had not gone extinct in any of the replicates after 500 generations of evolution. One of these replicates was continued for 2,500 generations, over which Cit continued to coexist. The researchers concluded that the extinction of Cit had been due to some unknown \"rare environmental perturbation\", similar to that which can impact natural populations. The final replicate was integrated into the main LTEE experiment, becoming the thirteenth population, Ara-7.\n\nOther researchers have experimented on evolving aerobic citrate-utilizing \"E. coli\". Dustin Van Hofwegen et al., working in the lab of Scott Minnich, were able to isolate 46 independent citrate-utilizing mutants of \"E. coli\" in just 12 to 100 generations using highly prolonged selection under starvation, during which the bacteria would sample more mutations more rapidly. In their research, the genomic DNA sequencing revealed an amplification of the \"citT\" and \"dctA\" loci, and rearrangement of DNA were the same class of mutations identified in the experiment by Richard Lenski and his team. They concluded that the rarity of the citrate-utilizing mutant in Lenski's research was likely a result of the selective experimental conditions used by his team rather than being a unique evolutionary speciation event.\n\nJohn Roth and Sophie Maisnier-Patin reviewed the approaches in both the Lenski team's delayed mutations and the Van Hofweges team's rapid mutations on \"E. coli\". They argue that both teams experienced the same sequence of potentiation, actualization, and refinement leading up to similar Cit variants. According to them, the period of less than a day during which citrate usage would be under selection, followed by 100-fold dilution, and a period of growth on glucose that would not select for citrate use, ultimately lowered the probability of \"E. coli\" being able accumulate early adaptive mutations from one period of selection to the next. On the other hand, Van Hofwegen's team allowed for a continuous selection period of 7 days, which yielded a more rapid development of citrate-using \"E. coli\". Roth and Maisnier-Patin suggest that the serial dilution of \"E. coli\" and short period of selection for citrate-use under the conditions of the LTEE perpetually impeded each generation of \"E. coli\" from reaching the next stages of aerobic citrate utilization.\n\nIn response, Blount and Lenski acknowledge that the problem is not with the experiments or the data, but with the interpretations made by Van Hofwegen et al. and Maisnier-Patin and Roth. Lenski notes that the rapid evolution of Cit was not necessarily unexpected since his team was also able to produce multiple Cit mutants in a few weeks during the replay experiments they reported in the 2008 paper in which his team first described the evolution of aerobic citrate use in the LTEE. Furthermore, Lenski criticizes Van Hofwegen et al.'s description of the initial evolution of Cit as a \"speciation event\" by pointing out that the LTEE was not designed to isolate citrate-using mutants or to deal with speciation since in their 2008 paper they said \"that becoming Cit was only a first step on the road to possible speciation\", and thus did not propose that the Cit mutants were a different species, but that speciation might be an eventual consequence of the trait's evolution. Lenski acknowledges that scientists, including him and his team, often use short hand and jargon when discussing speciation, instead of writing more carefully and precisely on the matter, and this can cause issues. However, he notes that speciation is generally considered by evolutionary biologists to be a process, and not an event. He also criticizes Van Hofwegen et al. and Roth and Maisnier-Patin for positing \"false dichotomies\" regarding the complex concept of historical contingency. He argues that historical contingency means that history matters, and that their 2008 paper presented data that showed that the evolution of Cit in the LTEE was contingent upon mutations that had accumulated earlier. He concludes that \"...historical contingency was invoked and demonstrated in a specific context, namely that of the emergence of Cit in the LTEE—it does not mean that the emergence of Cit is historically contingent in other experimental contexts, nor for that matter that other changes in the LTEE are historically contingent—in fact, some other evolved changes in the LTEE have been highly predictable and not (or at least not obviously) contingent on prior mutations in the populations.\"\n\n\n\n", "id": "17998857", "title": "E. coli long-term evolution experiment"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12752899", "text": "Alloenzyme\n\nAlloenzymes (or also called allozymes) are variant forms of an enzyme which differs structurally but not functionally from other allozymes coded for by different alleles at the same locus. These are opposed to isozymes, which are enzymes that perform the same function, but which are coded by genes located at different loci.\n\nAlloenzymes are common biological enzymes that exhibit high levels of functional evolutionary conservation throughout specific phyla and kingdoms. They are used by phylogeneticists as molecular markers to gauge evolutionary histories and relationships between different species. This can be done because allozymes do not have the same structure. They can be separated by capillary electrophoresis. However, some species are monomorphic for many of their allozymes which would make it difficult for phylogeneticists to assess the evolutionary histories of these species. In these instances, phylogeneticists would have to use another method to determine the evolutionary history of a species.\n\nThese enzymes generally perform very basic functions found commonly throughout all lifeforms, such as DNA polymerase, the enzyme that repairs and copies DNA. Significant changes in this enzyme reflect significant events in evolutionary history of organisms. As expected DNA polymerase shows relatively small differences in its amino acid sequence between phyla and even kingdoms.\n\nThe key to choosing which alloenzyme to use in a comparison between multiple species is to choose one that is as variable as possible while still being present in all the organisms. By comparing the amino acid sequence of the enzyme in the species, more amino acid similarities should be seen in species that are more closely related, and fewer between those that are more distantly related. The less well conserved the enzyme is, the more amino acid differences will be present in even closely related species.\n\n", "id": "12752899", "title": "Alloenzyme"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10560587", "text": "Evolutionary mismatch\n\nEvolutionary mismatch, also known as mismatch theory or evolutionary trap, is a concept in evolutionary biology that refers to evolved traits that were once advantageous but became maladaptive due to changes in the environment. This can take place in humans and animals and is often attributed to rapid environmental change.\nMismatch theory represents the idea that traits that evolved in an organism in one environment can be disadvantageous in a different environment. This environmental change leading to evolutionary mismatch can be broken down into two major categories: temporal (change of the existing environment over time, e.g. a climate change) or spatial (placing organisms into a new environment, e.g. a population migrating). Since environmental change occurs naturally and constantly, there will certainly be examples of evolutionary mismatch over time. However, because large-scale natural environmental change – like a natural disaster – is often rare, it is less often observed. Another more prevalent kind of environmental change is anthropogenic (human-caused). In recent times, humans have had a large, rapid, and trackable impact on our environment, thus creating scenarios where it is easier to observe evolutionary mismatch.\n\nBecause of the mechanism of evolution by natural selection, the environment (\"nature\") determines (\"selects\") which traits will persist in a population. Therefore, there will be a gradual weeding out of disadvantageous traits over several generations as the population becomes more adapted to its environment. Any significant change in a population's traits that cannot be attributed to other factors (such as genetic drift and mutation) will be responsive to a change in that population's environment; in other words, natural selection is inherently reactive. Shortly following an environmental change, traits that evolved in the previous environment, whether they were advantageous or neutral, are persistent for several generations in the new environment. Because evolution is gradual and environmental changes often occur very quickly on a geological scale, there is always a period of \"catching-up\" as the population evolves to become adapted to the environment. It is this temporary period of \"disequilibrium\" that is referred to as mismatch. Mismatched traits are ultimately addressed in one of several possible ways: the organism may evolve such that the maladaptive trait is no longer expressed, the organism may decline and/or become extinct as a result of the disadvantageous trait, or the environment may change such that the trait is no longer selected against.\n\nAs evolutionary thought became more prevalent, scientists studied and attempted to explain the existence of disadvantageous traits, known as maladaptations, that are the basis of evolutionary mismatch.\n\nThe theory of evolutionary mismatch began under the term evolutionary trap as early as the 1940s. In his 1942 book, evolutionary biologist Ernst Mayr described evolutionary traps as the phenomenon that occurs when a genetically uniform population suited for a single set of environmental conditions is susceptible to extinction from sudden environment changes. Since then, key scientists such as Warren J. Gross and Edward O. Wilson have studied and identified numerous examples of evolutionary traps.\n\nThe first occurrence of the term \"evolutionary mismatch\" may have been in a paper by Jack E. Riggs published in the Journal of Clinical Epidemiology in 1993. In the years to follow, the term evolutionary mismatch has become widely used to describe biological maladaptations in a wide range of disciplines. A coalition of modern scientists and community organizers assembled to found the Evolution Institute in 2008, and in 2011 published a more recent culmination of information on evolutionary mismatch theory in an article by Elisabeth Lloyd, David Sloan Wilson, and Elliott Sober.\n\nMany members of the scientific community continue to explore the effects of evolutionary mismatch in our quickly changing world.\n\nThe Neolithic Revolution brought about significant evolutionary changes in humans; namely the transition from a hunter-gatherer lifestyle, in which humans foraged for food, to an agricultural lifestyle. This change occurred approximately 10,000–12,000 years ago. Humans began to domesticate both plants and animals, allowing for the maintenance of constant food resources. This transition quickly and dramatically changed the way that humans interact with the environment, with societies taking up practices of farming and animal husbandry. However, human bodies had evolved to be adapted to their previous foraging lifestyle. The slow pace of evolution in comparison with the very fast pace of human advancement allowed for the persistence of these adaptations in an environment where they are no longer necessary. In human societies that now function in a vastly different way from the hunter-gatherer lifestyle, these outdated adaptations now lead to the presence of maladaptive, or mismatched, traits.\n\nIt should be noted that some modern human populations engage in hunter-gatherer practices.\n\nHuman bodies are predisposed to maintain homeostasis, especially when storing energy as fat. This trait serves as the main basis for the \"thrifty gene hypothesis\", the idea that \"feast-or-famine conditions during human evolutionary development naturally selected for people whose bodies were efficient in their use of food calories\". Hunter-gatherers, who used to live under environmental stress, benefit from this trait; there was an uncertainty of when the next meal would be, and they would spend most of their time performing high levels of physical activity. Therefore, those that consumed many calories would store the extra energy as fat, which they could draw upon in times of hunger.\n\nHowever, modern humans have evolved to a world of more sedentary lifestyles and convenience foods. People are sitting more throughout their days, whether it be in their cars during rush hour or in their cubicles during their full-time jobs. Less physical activity in general means fewer calories burned throughout the day. Human diets have changed considerably over the 10,000 years since the advent of agriculture, with more processed foods in their diets that lack nutritional value and lead them to consume more sodium, sugar, and fat. These high calorie, nutrient-deficient foods cause people to consume more calories than they burn. Fast food combined with decreased physical activity means that the \"thrifty gene\" that once benefit human predecessors now works against them, causing their bodies to store more fat and leading to higher levels of obesity in the population.\n\nObesity is one consequence of mismatched genes. Known as \"metabolic syndrome\", this condition is also associated with other health concerns, including insulin resistance, where the body no longer responds to insulin secretion, so blood glucose levels are unable to be lowered, which can lead to type 2 diabetes.\n\nAnother human disorder that can be explained by mismatch theory is the rise in osteoporosis in modern humans. In advanced societies, many people, especially women, are remarkably susceptible to osteoporosis during aging. Fossil evidence has suggested that this was not always the case, with bones from elderly hunter-gatherer women often showing no evidence of osteoporosis. Evolutionary biologists have posited that the increase in osteoporosis in modern Western populations is likely due to our considerably sedentary lifestyles. Women in hunter-gatherer societies were physically active both from a young age and well into their late-adult lives. This constant physical activity likely lead to peak bone mass being considerably higher in hunter-gatherer humans than in modern-day humans. While the pattern of bone mass degradation during aging is purportedly the same for both hunter-gatherers and modern humans, the higher peak bone mass associated with more physical activity may have led hunter-gatherers to be able to develop a propensity to avoid osteoporosis during aging.\n\nThe hygiene hypothesis, a concept initially theorized by immunologists and epidemiologists, has been proved to have a strong connection with evolutionary mismatch through recent year studies. Hygiene hypothesis states that the profound increase in allergies, autoimmune diseases, and some other chronic inflammatory diseases is related to the reduced exposure of the immune system to antigens. Such reduced exposure is more common in industrialized countries and especially urban areas, where the inflammatory chronic diseases are also more frequently seen. Recent analysis and studies have tied the hygiene hypothesis and evolutionary mismatch together. Some researchers suggest that the overly sterilized urban environment changes or depletes the microbiota composition and diversity. Such environmental conditions favor the development of the inflammatory chronic diseases because human bodies have been selected to adapt to a pathogen-rich environment in the history of evolution. For example, studies have shown that change in our symbiont community can lead to the disorder of immune homeostasis, which can be used to explain why antibiotic use in early childhood can result in higher asthma risk. Because the change or depletion of the microbiome is often associated with hygiene hypothesis, the hypothesis is sometimes also called \"biome depletion theory\".\n\nBehavioral examples of evolutionary mismatch theory result from the abuse of dopaminergic pathways and the reward system. An action or behavior that stimulates the release of dopamine, a neurotransmitter known for generating a sense of pleasure, will likely be repeated since the brain is programmed to continually seek such pleasure. In hunter-gatherer societies, this reward system was beneficial for survival and reproductive success. But now, when there are fewer challenges to survival and reproducing, certain activities in the present environment (gambling, drug use, eating) exploit this system, leading to addictive behaviors.\n\nThere are two aspects of gambling that make it an addictive activity: chance and risk. Chance gives gambling its novelty. Back when humans had to forage and hunt for food, novelty-seeking was advantageous for them, particularly for their diet. However, with the development of casinos, this trait of pursuing novelties has become disadvantageous. Risk assessment, the other behavioral trait applicable to gambling, was also beneficial to hunter-gatherers in the face of danger. However, the types of risks hunter-gatherers had to assess are significantly different and more life-threatening than the risks people now face. The attraction to gambling stems from the attraction to risk and reward related activity.\n\nHerbivores have created selective pressure for plants to possess specific molecules that deter plant consumption, such as nicotine, morphine, and cocaine. Plant-based drugs, however, have reinforcing and rewarding effects on the human neurological system, suggesting a \"paradox of drug reward\" in humans. Human behavioral evolutionary mismatch explains the contradiction between plant evolution and human drug use. In the last 10,000 years, humans found the dopaminergic system, or reward system, particularly useful in optimizing Darwinian fitness. While drug use has been a common characteristic of past human populations, drug use involving potent substances and diverse intake methods is a relatively contemporary feature of society. Human ancestors lived in an environment that lacked drug use of this nature, so the reward system was primarily used in maximizing survival and reproductive success. In contrast, present-day humans live in a world where the current nature of drugs render the reward system maladaptive. This class of drugs falsely triggers a fitness benefit in the reward system, leaving people susceptible to drug addiction. The modern-day dopaminergic system presents vulnerabilities to the difference in accessibility and social perception of drugs.\n\nIn the era of foraging for food, hunter-gatherers rarely knew where their next meal would come from. As a result, filling their stomachs up with lots of food was advantageous since food was scarce. Intense consumption of high-energy foods was selected for when the availability of food was low and it was more difficult to find. Now, food is readily available, and the neurological system that once helped people recognize the survival advantages of essential eating has now become disadvantageous as it promotes overeating. This has become especially dangerous after the rise of processed foods, as the popularity of foods that have unnaturally high levels of sugar and fat has significantly increased.\n\nEvolutionary mismatch can occur any time an organism is exposed to an environment that does not resemble the typical environment the organism adapted in. Due to human influences, such as global warming and habitat destruction, the environment is changing very rapidly for many organisms, leading to numerous cases of evolutionary mismatch.\n\nFemale sea turtles create nests to lay their eggs by digging a pit on the beach, typically between the high tide line and dune, using their rear flippers. Consequently, within the first seven days of hatching, hatchling sea turtles must make the journey from the nest back into the ocean. This trip occurs predominantly at night in order to avoid predators and overheating.\n\nIn order to orient themselves towards the ocean, the hatchlings depend on their eyes to turn towards the brightest direction. This is because the open horizon of the ocean, illuminated by celestial light, tends to be much brighter in a natural undeveloped beach than the dunes and vegetation. Studies propose two mechanisms of the eye for this phenomenon. Referred to as the \"raster system\", the theory is that sea turtles' eyes contain numerous light sensors which take in the overall brightness information of a general area and make a \"measurement\" of where the light is most intense. If the light sensors detect the most intense light on a hatchling's left side, the sea turtle would turn left. A similar proposal called the complex phototropotaxis system theorizes that the eyes contain light intensity comparators that take in detailed information of the intensity of light from all directions. Sea turtles are able to \"know\" that they are facing the brightest direction when the light intensity is balanced between both eyes.\n\nThis method of finding the ocean is successful in natural beaches, but in developed beaches, the intense artificial lights from buildings, light houses, and even abandoned fires overwhelm the sea turtles and cause them to head towards the artificial light instead of the ocean. Scientists call this misorientation. Sea turtles can also become disoriented and circle around in the same place. Numerous cases show that misoriented hatchling sea turtles either die from dehydration, get consumed by a predator, or even burn to death in an abandoned fire. The direct impact of light pollution on the number of sea turtles has been too difficult to measure. However, this problem is exacerbated because all species of sea turtles are endangered. Other animals, including migratory birds and insects, are also victims to light pollution because they also depend on light intensity at night to properly orient themselves. (See Threats to sea turtles for more information.)\n\nThe Dodo bird lived on a remote Island, Mauritius, in the absence of predators. Here, the Dodo evolved to lose its instinct for fear and the ability to fly. This allowed them to be easily hunted by Dutch sailors who arrived on the island in the late 16th century. The Dutch sailors also brought foreign animals to the island such as monkeys and pigs that ate the Dodo bird's eggs, which was detrimental to the population growth of the slow breeding bird. Their fearlessness made them easy targets and their inability to fly gave them no opportunity to evade danger. Thus, they were easily driven to extinction within a century of their discovery.\n\nThe Dodo's inability to fly was once beneficial for the bird because it conserved energy. The Dodo conserved more energy relative to birds with the ability to fly, due to the Dodo's smaller pectoral muscles. Smaller muscle sizes are linked to lower rates of maintenance metabolism, which in turn conserves energy for the Dodo. Lacking an instinct for fear was another mechanism through which the Dodo conserved energy because it never had to expend any energy for a stress response. Both mechanisms of conservation of energy was once advantageous because it enabled the Dodo to execute activities with minimal energy expenditure. However, these proved disadvantageous when their island was invaded, rendering them defenseless to the new dangers that humans brought.\n\nBefore the English Industrial Revolution of the late 18th and early 19th centuries the most common phenotypic color of the peppered moth was white with black speckles. However, that changed when the Industrial Revolution produced high levels of pollution. Due to the Industrial Revolution the trees blackened in urban regions, causing the original phenotype to stand out significantly more to predators. Natural selection then began favoring the rare dark peppered carbonaria moth in order for the species to camouflage and prevent attacks. The dark moth's population expanded rapidly and by the 1950s vast amounts of England saw carbonaria frequencies rise above 90%. The once favorable white speckled phenotype quickly became mismatched in the new environment.\n\nHowever, in the late 1900s, the English made efforts to reduce air pollution, causing the trees to turn back to their normal shade. The change in color lead the dark skin phenotype to revert from beneficial to disadvantageous. Once again, the moth was not able to adapt fast enough to the changing environment and thus the carbonaria phenotype became mismatched. Since the trees' return to their natural color caused the original phenotype to become advantageous again since it allowed the peppered moth to hide from predators.\n\nEvolutionary mismatch can also be seen among insects. One such example is in the case of the Giant Jewel Beetle (\"Julodimorpha bakewelli)\". The male jewel beetle has evolved to be attracted to certain features of the female jewel beetle that allow the male jewel beetle to identify a female as it flies across the desert. These features include size, color, and texture. However, these physical traits are seen manifested in beer bottles as well. As a result, male jewel beetles often consider beer bottles more attractive than female jewel beetles due to the beer bottle's large size and attractive coloring. Beer bottles are often discarded by humans in the Australian desert that the jewel beetle thrives in, creating an environment where male jewel beetles prefer to mate with beer bottles instead of female jewel beetles. This is a situation that is extremely disadvantageous as it reduces the reproductive output of the jewel beetle as fewer beetles are mating. This condition can be considered an evolutionary mismatch, as a habit that evolved to aid in reproduction has become disadvantageous due to the littering of beer bottles, an anthropogenic cause.\n\nNormally, gaining information from watching other organisms allows the observer to make good decisions without spending effort. More specifically, birds often observe the behavior of other organisms to gain valuable information, such as the presence of predators, good breeding sites, and optimal feeding spots. Although this allows the observer to spend less effort gathering information, it can also lead to bad decisions if the information gained from observing is unreliable. In the case of the nutmeg mannikins, the observer can minimize the time spent looking for an optimal feeder and maximize its feeding time by watching where other nutmeg mannikins feed. However, this relies on the assumption that the observed mannikins also had reliable information that indicated the feeding spot was an ideal one. This behavior can become maladaptive when prioritizing information gained from watching others leads to information cascades, where birds follow the rest of the crowd even though prior experience may have suggested that the decision of the crowd is a poor one. For instance, if a nutmeg mannikin sees enough mannikins feeding at a feeder, nutmeg mannikins have been shown to choose that feeder even if their personal experience indicates that the feeder is a poor one.\n\nEvolutionary mismatch occurs in house finches when they are exposed to infectious individuals. Male house finches tend to feed in close proximity to other finches that are sick or diseased. This is due to the fact that sick individuals are less competitive than usual, in turn increasing the chances of the healthy male to win an aggressive interaction if it happens. To ensure that there is a lower possibility of losing a social confrontation, healthy finches are inclined to forage near individuals that are lethargic or listless due to disease. However, this disposition has created an evolutionary trap for the finches after the introduction of the MG disease in 1994. Since this disease is infectious, healthy finches will be in danger of contraction if they are in the vicinity of individuals that have previously developed the disease. The relatively short duration of the disease's introduction has caused an inability for the finches to adapt quickly enough to avoid nearing sick individuals, which ultimately results in the mismatch between their behavior and the changing environment.\n\nWorm charming is a practice used by people to attract earthworms out of the ground by driving in a wooden stake to vibrate the soil. This activity is commonly performed to collect fishing bait and as a competitive sport. Worms that sense the vibrations rise to the surface. Research shows that humans are actually taking advantage of a trait that worms adapted to avoid hungry burrowing moles which prey on the worms. This type of evolutionary trap, where an originally beneficial trait is exploited in order to catch prey, was coined the \"rare enemy effect\" by Richard Dawkins, an English evolutionary biologist. This trait of worms has been exploited not only by humans, but by other animals. Herring gulls and wood turtles have been observed to also stamp on the ground to drive the worms up to the surface and consume them.\n", "id": "10560587", "title": "Evolutionary mismatch"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19226315", "text": "Vicar of Bray (scientific hypothesis)\n\nThe \"Vicar of Bray\" hypothesis (or Fisher-Muller Model)\nattempts to explain why sexual reproduction might have advantages over asexual reproduction - sexual populations having the ability to out-compete asexual populations because they evolve more rapidly in response to environmental changes. The offspring of a population of sexually reproducing individuals will show a more varied selection of phenotypes and they will therefore be more likely to produce a strain that can survive a change in the ecology of the environment in which they live. Under the Vicar of Bray hypothesis, sex benefits a population as a whole, but not individuals within it, making it a case of group selection.\n\nThe hypothesis originated with August Weismann (1889)\nand takes its current popular name after the Vicar of Bray, a semi-fictionalised cleric who retained his ecclesiastic office by quickly adapting to the prevailing religious winds in England, switching between various Protestant and Catholic rites as the ruling hierarchy changed.\nMost biologists accepted a mathematized version of this explanation as providing one of the most important reasons for the prevalence of sexual reproduction in the natural world until the Williams Revolution (George C. Williams's critiques of group selection) re-examined the implicit group-selectionist character of the argument and led to a gene-centered view of evolution in the 1960s. a more popular explanation for the evolutionary origin and maintenance of sex comes in the form of the Red Queen Hypothesis, which instead proposes that sex benefits individual genes directly.\n", "id": "19226315", "title": "Vicar of Bray (scientific hypothesis)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19643233", "text": "List of examples of convergent evolution\n\nConvergent evolution — the repeated evolution of similar traits in multiple lineages which all ancestrally lack the trait — is rife in nature, as illustrated by the examples below. The ultimate cause of convergence is usually a similar evolutionary biome, as similar environments will select for similar traits in any species occupying the same ecological niche, even if those species are only distantly related. In the case of cryptic species, it can create species which are only distinguishable by analysing their genetics. Unrelated organisms often develop analogous structures by adapting to similar environments.\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\nHere is a list of examples in which unrelated proteins have similar functions with different structure.\n\n\nHere is a list of examples in which unrelated proteins have similar tertiary structures but different functions. Whole protein structural convergence is not thought to occur but some convergence of pockets and secondary structural elements have been documented.\n\n\n", "id": "19643233", "title": "List of examples of convergent evolution"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4057413", "text": "Selection coefficient\n\nIn population genetics, a selection coefficient, usually denoted by the letter \"s\", is a measure of differences in fitness. Selection coefficients are central to the quantitative description of evolution, since fitness differences determine the change in genotype frequencies attributable to selection.\n\nThe following definition of \"s\" is commonly used. Suppose that there are two genotypes \"A\" and \"B\" in a population with relative fitnesses formula_1 and formula_2 respectively. Then, choosing genotype \"A\" as our point of reference, we have formula_3, and formula_4, where \"s\" measures the fitness advantage (positive \"s\") or disadvantage (negative \"s\") of \"B\".\n\nFor example, the lactose-tolerant allele spread from very low frequencies to high frequencies in less than 9000 years since farming with an estimated selection coefficient of 0.09-0.19 for a Scandinavian population. Though this selection coefficient might seem like a very small number, over evolutionary time, the favored alleles accumulate in the population and become more and more common, potentially reaching fixation.\n\n", "id": "4057413", "title": "Selection coefficient"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20087534", "text": "Empathic concern\n\nEmpathic concern refers to other-oriented emotions elicited by and congruent with the perceived welfare of someone in need. These other-oriented emotions include feelings of tenderness, sympathy, compassion, soft-heartedness, and the like. \n\nEmpathic concern is often and wrongly confused with empathy. To empathize is to respond to another's perceived emotional state by experiencing feeling of a similar sort. Empathic concern or sympathy not only include empathizing, but also entails having a positive regard or a non-fleeting concern for the other person.\n\nC. Daniel Batson is one chief pioneer of the term. His mature definition of the term is \"\"other-oriented emotion elicited by and congruent with the perceived welfare of someone in need\"\". Batson explains this definition in the following way. \n\nMany writers other than Batson use different terms for this construct or very similar constructs. Especially popular—perhaps more popular than 'empathic concern'—are sympathy, compassion or pity. Other terms include the tender emotion and sympathetic distress.\n\nHuman beings are strongly motivated to be connected to others. In humans and higher mammals, an impulse to care for offspring is almost certainly genetically hard-wired, although modifiable by circumstance.\n\nAt the behavioral level it is evident from the descriptions of comparative psychologists and ethologists that behaviors homologous to empathic concern can be observed in other mammalian species. Notably, a variety of reports on ape empathic reactions suggest that, apart from emotional connectedness, apes have an explicit appreciation of the other's situation. A good example is consolation, defined as reassurance behavior by an uninvolved bystander towards one of the combatants in a previous aggressive incident.\n\nEmpathic concern is thought to emerge later developmental and to require more self-control than either emotional contagion or personal distress. Developmental research indicates a broad range of social competencies children bring to their interpersonal relationships. As early as 2 years of age, they show (a) the cognitive capacity to interpret, in simple ways, the physical and psychological states of others, (b) the emotional capacity to experience, affectively, the state of others, and (c) the behavioral repertoire that permits the possibility of attempts to alleviate discomfort in others. \n\nBoth personal disposition such as temperament and social context contribute to individual differences in concern for others. Some developmental psychologists have hypothesized that empathic concern for others are essential factors inhibiting aggression toward others.\n\nEmpathic concern may produce an altruistic motivation to reduce the other person's distress. The challenge of demonstrating the existence of altruistic motivation is to show how empathic concern leads to helping in ways that cannot be explained by prevailing theories of egoistic motivation. That is, a clear case needs to be made that it is concern about the other person's welfare, not a desire to improve one's own welfare, that primarily drives one's helping behavior in a particular situation. \n\nEmpirical studies conducted by social psychologist Daniel Batson have demonstrated that empathic concern is felt when one adopts the perspective of another person in need. His work emphasizes the different emotions evoked when imagining another situation from a self-perspective or imagining from another perspective. The former is often associated with personal distress (i.e., feelings of discomfort and anxiety), whereas the latter leads to empathic concern.\n\nSocial neuroscience explores the biological underpinnings of empathic concern and more generally interpersonal sensitivity, using an integrative approach that bridges the biological and social levels. Neural systems, including autonomic functions, that rely on brain stem neuropeptides, such as oxytocin and vasopressin, are plausible correlates for empathic concern. Alternatively, vasopressin might be implicated in situations where a more active strategy is required for an effective response.\n\nAn association between executive functions, underpinned by the prefrontal cortex with reciprocal connections with the limbic system, the sense of agency, and empathic concern has been suggested based on lesion studies in neurological patients and functional neuroimaging experiments in healthy individuals. \n\nThe difference between imaging self versus imaging other is supported by a series of functional neuroimaging studies of affective processing. For instance, Lamm, Batson and Decety (2007) found that participants reported more empathic concern when imagining the pain of others when adopting another perspective, and more personal distress when imagining themselves to be in pain. \n\nThe fMRI scans revealed that imagining self in pain was associated with strong activation in brain areas involved in affective response to threat and pain, including the amygdala, insula and anterior cingulate cortex. Imagine-other instructions produced higher activity in the right temporoparietal junction (or TPJ), which is associated with self-other distinctiveness and the sense of agency.\n\n", "id": "20087534", "title": "Empathic concern"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6778877", "text": "Sexual conflict\n\nSexual conflict or sexual antagonism occurs when the two sexes have conflicting optimal fitness strategies concerning reproduction, particularly over the mode and frequency of mating, potentially leading to an evolutionary arms race between males and females. For instance, males may benefit from multiple matings, while multiple matings may harm or endanger females. The development of an evolutionary arms race can also be seen in the chase-away sexual selection model, which places inter-sexual conflicts in the context of secondary sexual characteristic evolution, sensory exploitation, and female resistance. According to chase-away selection, continuous sexual conflict creates an environment in which mating frequency and male secondary sexual trait development are somewhat in step with the female's degree of resistance. It has primarily been studied in animals, though it can in principle apply to any sexually reproducing organism, such as plants and fungi. There is some evidence for sexual conflict in plants.\n\nSexual conflict takes two major forms:\n\n\nSexual conflict may lead to antagonistic co-evolution, in which one sex (usually male) evolves a favorable trait that is offset by a countering trait in the other sex. Similarly, interlocus sexual conflict can be the result of what is called a perpetual cycle. The perpetual cycle begins with the traits that favor male reproductive competition, which eventually manifests into male persistence. These favorable traits will cause a reduction in the fitness of females due to their persistence. Following this event, females may develop a counter-adaptation, that is, a favorable trait that reduces the direct costs implemented by males. This is known as female resistance. After this event, females' fitness depression decreases, and the cycle starts again. Interlocus sexual conflict reflects interactions among mates to achieve their optimal fitness strategies and can be explained through evolutionary concepts.\n\nSensory exploitation by males is one mechanism that involves males attempting to overcome female reluctance. It can result in chase-away selection, which then leads to a co-evolutionary arms race. There are also other mechanisms involved in sexual conflict such as traumatic insemination, forced copulation, penis fencing, love darts and others.\n\nFemale resistance traditionally includes reducing negative effects to mechanisms implemented by males, but outside the norm may include sexual cannibalism, increased fitness in females on offspring and increased aggression to males.\n\nAnimal species that are not in a state of sexual conflict are more likely to be in sync to the male dominance hierarchy as the females are more docile in these organizations such as wolves, common rabbits and crocodiles. Others, such as spiders, ants and orcas are female-dominated. Some regard sexual conflict as a subset of sexual selection (which was traditionally regarded as mutualistic), while others suggest it is a separate evolutionary phenomenon.\n\nThe differences between male and female general evolutionary interests can be better understood through the analysis of the various factors that affect sexual conflict. In situations involving a male and female, only the relative positions of the optimal trait values are important as it is their comparative positions that provide insight into the resulting conflict. The trait value bar at the bottom of the accompanying figure indicates the relative intensity of each trait. The left side represents the poorly developed end of intensity range, while the right side represents the strongly developed end of the range.\n\nMales and females differ in the following general components of fitness, thus leading to sexual conflict. Refer to the accompanying figure in this section.\n\nMating rate: Males generally increase their fitness by mating with multiple mates, while females are on the middle section of the range because they do not favor a particular side of the spectrum. For instance, females tend to be the choosier sex, but the presence of female sexual promiscuity in Soay sheep show that females do not have an established mating preference.\n\nFemale stimulation threshold: Generally, females benefit from being more selective than males would like them to be. For example, the Neotropical spider, \"Paratrechalea ornata\", displays nuptial gift-giving behaviors during courtship as a part of their male mating efforts. These nuptials gifts allow the male to control copulation duration and to increase the speed of female oviposition.\n\nDegree of female fidelity: Because female fidelity depends on the species' particular mating system, therefore they are in the middle section of the spectrum. However, males seeking mates have different preferences depending on whether they are unpaired or paired. Paired males benefit from high female fidelity, while unpaired males benefit from low female fidelity in order to increase their mating frequencies.\n\nToxicity of seminal fluid: Females benefit from low seminal fluid toxicity, while males benefit from a high toxicity level as it increases their competitive edge.\n\nFemale fecundity: Males benefit from a high female fecundity as it means that females can produce more offspring and have a higher potential for reproduction. It is important to note that females also benefit from high fecundity, and thus this trait is probably more affected by classical natural selection.\n\nMaternal investment: In many species, males benefit from high maternal investment as it allows them to preserve more energy and time for additional matings rather than investing their resources on one offspring. Females are expected to invest a certain amount of time and resources, but it can also be detrimental to the female if too much maternal investment is expected.\n\nNatural and/or sexual selection on traits that influence the fitness of either male or female give rise to fundamental phenotypic and behavioral differences between them referred to as sexual dimorphism. Selective pressures on such traits give rise to differences in expression of these genes either at transcriptional or translational level. In certain cases these differences are as dramatic as genes not being expressed at all in either of the sexes. These differences in gene expression are the result of either natural selection on reproductive potential and survival traits of either sex or sexual selection on traits relevant to intra-sexual competition and inter-sexual mate choice.\n\nSex biased genes could either be male or female biased and sequence analysis of these protein coding genes have revealed their faster rate of evolution which has been attributed to their positive selection vs. reduced selective constraint. Apart from sex specific natural selection and sexual selection that includes both intersexual and intrasexual selection, a third phenomenon also explains the differences in gene expressions between two sexes – sexual antagonism. Sexual antagonism represents an evolutionary conflict at a single or multiple locus that contribute differentially to the male and female fitness. The conflict occurs as the spread of an allele at one locus in either male or female that lowers the fitness of the other sex. This gives rise to different selection pressure on males and females. Since the allele is beneficial for one sex and detrimental to the other, counter adaptations in the form of suppressor alleles at different genetic loci can develop that reduce the effects of deleterious allele, giving rise to differences in gene expression. Selection on such traits in males would select for suppressor alleles in females thus increasing the chances of retaining the deleterious allele in the population in interlocus sexual conflict.\n\nThe retention of such antagonistic alleles in a population could also be explained in terms of increase in the net fitness of the maternal line, for example, the locus for male sexual orientation in humans was identified on subtelomeric regions of X chromosomes after studies conducted on 114 families of homosexual men. Same sex orientation was found to be higher in maternal uncles and male cousins of the gay subjects. An evolutionary model explained this finding in terms of increased fertility of the females in maternal lines, hence adding to net fitness gain.\n\nCombined data from coding sequence studies in \"C. elegans\", \"Drosophila\", Humans and Chimps show a similar pattern of molecular evolution in sex biased genes, i.e. most of the male and female biased genes when compared to genes equally expressed in both had higher Ka/Ks ratio. Male biased genes show greater divergence than female biased genes. The Ka/Ks ratio was higher for male biased genes which are expressed exclusively in reproductive tissues e.g. testis in primate lineages. In \"C. elegans\", which is an androdioecious species (a population consisting of only hermaphrodites and males), the rate of evolution for genes expressed during spermatogenesis was higher in males than in hermaphrodites. In \"Drosophila\", interspecies divergence was found to be higher than intraspecific polymorphism at non synonymous sites of male biased genes which elucidated the role of positive selection and showed that male biased genes undergo frequent adaptive evolution. It should be noted here that although positive evolution is associated with most of the male and female biased genes, it's difficult to isolate genes which shown bias solely due to sexual conflict/antagonism. Nevertheless, since sexually antagonistic genes give rise to biased expression and most biased genes are under positive selection we can argue the same in favor of sexually antagonistic genes. A similar trend as seen in coding sequence evolution was seen with gene expression levels. Interspecific expression divergence was higher than intraspecific expression polymorphism. Positive selection in Acps and Frtps has also been reported previously.\n\nAlthough X chromosomes have been considered as hot spots for accumulating sexually antagonistic alleles, other autosomal locations have also been reported to harbor sexually antagonistic alleles. The XY, XX and ZW, ZZ system of sex determination allows accelerated fixation of alleles that are sex-linked recessive, male-beneficial and female-detrimental due to constant exposure to positive selection acting on heterogametic sex (XY, ZW) as compared to purifying selection removing the alleles only in homozygous state. In case of partial or completely dominant sex linked traits which are detrimental to male, the probability of selecting for the allele would be 2/3 as compared to selecting against probability of 1/3. Considering the above scenario its likely that X and W chromosomes would harbor many sexually antagonistic alleles. However, recently Innocenti \"et al.\" identified sexually antagonistic candidate genes in \"Drosophila melanogaster\" that contributed about 8% of the total genes. These were distributed on X, second and third chromosomes. Accessory gland proteins which are male biased and shows positive selection reside entirely on autosomes. They are partially sexually antagonistic as they are not expressed in females and dominant in nature and hence under represented on X.\n\nInterlocus sexual conflict involves numerous evolutionary concepts that are applied to a wide range of species in order to provide explanations for the interactions between sexes. The conflict between the interactions of male and females can be described as an ongoing evolutionary arms race.\n\nAccording to Darwin (1859), sexual selection occurs when some individuals are favored over others of the same sex in the context of reproduction. Sexual selection and sexual conflict are related because males usually mate with multiple females while females typically mate with fewer males. It is hypothesized that both chase away selection and sexual conflict may be the result of males use of sensory exploitation. Males are able to exploit females' sensory biases due to the existence of female choice. For example, females may behave in ways that are considerably biased towards mating and fertilization success due the attractiveness of males who exhibit a deceptive or exaggerated secondary sex characteristic. Since some male traits are detrimental to females, the female becomes insensitive to these traits. Sexually antagonistic co-evolution entails the cyclic process between the exaggerated (persistent) traits and the resistant traits by the sexes. If male traits that decrease female fitness spread, then female preference will change.\n\nFemale resistance is an evolutionary concept where females develop traits to counter the males' influence. This concept can be supported by the examples of sexual conflict in the water strider and pygmy fish.\n\nMale water striders exhibit forced copulation on the female. As a result, the female will struggle with the male to reduce the detrimental effects. Female struggle is a by-product of female resistance.\n\nThe population of pygmy fish \"Xiphophorus pygmaeus\" or pygmy sword-tail fish initially consisted of small males. A study tested female choice using large hetero-specific males. They found that the female pigmy swordtail fish favored larger sized males, indicating that females changed their preference from small males to large males. This pattern of female preference for larger male body size disappeared in populations consisting of smaller males. The study concluded that this behavior is caused by female resistance and not due to a general preference for larger body size males.\n\nSperm competition is an evolutionary concept developed by Geoff Parker (1970) and describes a mechanism by which different males will compete to fertilize a female's egg. Sperm competition selects for both offensive and defensive traits. Offensive sperm competition consists of males displacing sperm from the previous male as well as the use of toxic sperm to destroy rival sperm. Conversely, defensive sperm competition consists of males preventing females from remating by prolonging the duration of their own mating or by restricting the females' interest in other males. Sperm competition can be exhibited throughout behavioral, morphological and physiological male adaptations. Some examples of behavioral adaptations are mate guarding or forced copulation. Morphological adaptations may include male claspers, altered genitalia (e.g. spiky genitals) and copulatory plugs (i.e. mating plugs). Physiological adaptations may consist of toxic sperm or other chemicals in the seminal fluid that delays a female's ability to remate.\n\nSexual conflict is exhibited when males target other males through sperm competition. For example, Iberian rock lizard (\"Lacerta monticola\") males create hard mating plugs. These mating plugs are placed within the female cloaca instantly after copulation, which was hypothesized to function as a \"chastity belt.\" However, the study found no evidence to support the hypothesis, as males were able to displace the mating plugs of other males. There is no direct conflict between males and females, but males may evolve manipulative traits to counter the removal of their mating plugs.\n\nMales also develop different behaviors for paternity assurance. A study of sperm competition revealed that there was a positive relationship between testis size and levels of sperm competition within groups. Higher levels of sperm competition were correlated to larger accessory reproductive glands, seminal vesicles, and interior prostates. Larger mating plugs were less likely to be removed.\n\nMales inflicting harm on females is a by-product of male adaptation in the context of sperm competition. The advantages to males may include: a) a decrease in the likelihood of females remating, b) the ability to produce more offspring, c) sperm maintenance, and d) sperm storage. These advantages are seen throughout all variations of mate traits such as toxic sperm, spiky genitalia, forced copulation, sexual cannibalism, penis fencing, love darts, mate guarding, harassment/aggressive behavior, and traumatic insemination.\n\nFemales can experience a wide range of detrimental effects from males. This may include: a) longevity reduction, b) distortion in feeding behaviors (which could increase food intake as seen in \"Drosophila\" fruit flies) c) increased risk of infection, d) wound repair through energy consumption, e) male manipulation of female reproductive schedules, f) susceptibility to predators, and g) reduced female immune response.\n\nHermaphrodites are organisms that have both male and female reproductive organs. It is possible for there to be sexual conflict within a species that is entirely hermaphroditic. An example of such is seen in some hermaphroditic flatworms such as \"Pseudobiceros bedfordi\". Their mating ritual involves penis fencing in which both try to stab to inseminate the other and at the same time avoid being stabbed. Being inseminated represents a cost because striking and hypodermic insemination can cause considerable injury; as a result, the conflict lies in adapting to be more adept at striking and parrying and avoiding being stabbed.\n\nThere are cases where hermaphrodites can fertilize their own eggs, but this is usually rare. Most hermaphrodites take on the role of a male or female to reproduce. Sexual conflict over mating can cause hermaphrodites to either cooperate or display aggressive behavior in the context of gender choice.\n\nInfanticide is a behavior that occurs in many species in which an adult kills the younger individuals, including eggs. Sexual conflict is one of the most common causes, although there are exceptions as demonstrated by the male bass eating their own juvenile descendants. Although males usually exhibit such behavior, females can also behave in the same way.\n\nInfanticide has been extensively studied in vertebrates such as hanuman langurs, big cats, house sparrows and mice. However, this behavior also occurs in the invertebrates. For example, in the spider \"Stegodyphus lineatus\", males invade female nests and toss out their egg sacs. Females only have one clutch in their lifetime, and experience reduced reproductive success if the clutch is lost. This results in vicious battles where injury and even death can occur. \"Jacana jacana\", a tropical wading bird, provides an example of infanticide by the female sex. Females guard a territory while males care for their young. As males are a limited resource, other females will commonly displace or kill their young. Males can then mate again and care for the young of the new female.\n\nThis behavior is costly to both sides, and counter-adaptations have evolved in the affected sex ranging from cooperative defense of their young to loss minimization strategies such as aborting existing offspring upon the arrival of a new male (the Bruce effect).\n\nTraumatic insemination describes the male's tactics of piercing a female and depositing sperm in order to ensure paternity success. Traumatic insemination in this sense incorporates species which display extra-genitalic traumatic insemination. Males have a needle-like intromittent organ. Examples include bed bugs, bat bugs and spiders.\n\nIn bed bugs \"Cimex lectularius\", for example, males initiate mating by climbing onto the female and piercing her abdomen. The male will then directly inject his sperm along with the accessory gland fluids into the female's blood. As a result, the female will have a distinct melanized scar in the region the male pierced. It was observed that males not only pierce females but also other males and nymphs. The females may suffer detrimental effects which can include blood leaking, wounds, the risk of infection, and the immune system having difficulty fighting off sperm in the blood.\n\nA study focused on the mating effects of bed bugs of other species such as female \"Hesperocimex sonorensis\" and a male \"Hesperocimex cochimiensis\". It was observed that \"H. sonorensis\" females died in a period of 24 to 48 hours after mating with \"H. cochimiensis\" males. When examining the females, it was evident that their abdomens were blackened and swollen due to an enormous number of immunoreactions. There is a direct relationship between the increase of mating and the decrease in female's lifespan.\n\nFemale bed bug mortality rate due to traumatic insemination could be related more to STDs rather than just the open wound. The same environmental microbes that were found on the male's genital were also found within the female. A study found a total of nine microbes, with five microbes actually causing mortality of females during copulation. \n\nAfrican bat bugs \"Afrocimex constrictus\" also perform extra-genitalic traumatic insemination. Males will puncture the female outside her genitals and ultimately inseminate them. It was observed that both males and females suffer from traumatic insemination. Males suffer from traumatic insemination because they expressed female like genitals, and were often at times mistaken for females. Females also displayed polymorphism because some females had distinct \"female-like\" genitals while others had a \"male-like\" appearance. The results showed that males along with females who had \"male-like\" genitals suffer less traumatic insemination compared to the distinct females. Female polymorphism could in fact be a result of evolution due to sexual conflict.\n\nMale spiders \"Harpactea sadistica\" perform extra-genitalic traumatic insemination with their needle-like intromittent organs that puncture the female's wall, resulting in direct insemination. Males also puncture females with their cheliceral fangs during courtship. Females have atrophied spermathecae (sperm-storage organs). The sperm storage organ removes sperm from males who mate later, which reflects cryptic female choice. Cryptic female choice refers to a female's opportunity to choose with which sperm to fertilize her eggs. It has been suggested that males may have developed this aggressive mate tactic as a result of the female sperm storage organ.\n\nToxic semen is most associated with \"Drosophila melanogaster\" fruit flies. \"Drosophila\" fruit flies exhibit toxic semen along with intra-genitalic traumatic insemination. The male places his intromittent organ within the female genitalia, following the piercing of her inner wall, to inject toxic semen. \"Drosophila\" males benefit highly from toxic semen because the female will be less likely to seek out or permit mating with other males.\n\nThe substances in the toxic ejaculate that have been linked to detrimental effects to females are known as accessory gland proteins (Acps). Acps are found in male seminal fluid. After Acps are transferred to the female, they cause a change in her behavior and physiology. Studies have revealed that females who received Acps from males suffered decreased lifespan and fitness. Currently it has been estimated that there are more than 100 different Acps. Acp genes have been found in a variety of species and genera. Acps have been described as displaying a conservation function because they reserve protein biochemical classes within the seminal fluid.\n\n\"Drosophila hibisci\" use mating plugs rather than traumatic insemination. The mating plugs of \"Drosophila hibisci\" are gelatinous, hard composites that adheres to the uterus of the female in the event of copulation. A study tested two hypotheses concerning mating plugs: a) that they were nutritional gifts for females to digest to provide maintenance of the eggs during maturation, or b) that they could serve as a chastity device to prevent sperm of rivals. The study found that mating plugs had no effect on female nutrition and serve as an enforcement device against rival males. Although this species of fruit flies (\"Drosophila hibisci\") found success in mating plugs, they are ineffective for other \"Drosophila\" species. A study found that males who insert their mating plugs within females were unable to prevent females from remating just four hours after mating. Therefore, the assumption can be made that male \"Drosophila melanogaster\" develop other male adaptations to compensate for mating plug insufficiency, including intra-genitalic traumatic insemination to directly deposit their sperm.\n\nBruchid beetle or bean weevil \"Callosobruchus maculatus\" males are known to express extra-genitalic traumatic insemination on females. The male Bruchid beetle's intromittent organ is described as having spines that are used to pierce the reproductive tract of the female.\n\nMales which had multiple copulations with the same female caused greater damage to her genitals. However, those same males transferred a small quantity of ejaculate compared to the virgin males. It was also observed that males which participated in copulation with females, at times, deposit no sperm through the wounds they created on the females.\n\nFemales which mated with more than one male suffered higher mortality. Females had a decrease in longevity as a result of receiving a large single ejaculate from males. However, females which received a total of two ejaculates were less likely to die compared to those that received just one ejaculate. The assumption could be made that females who mated 48 hours after the first copulation were lacking nutrition as they do not drink or eat. The ejaculate that was provided after the second copulation was nutritionally beneficial and lengthened female longevity, allowing them to produce more offspring.\n\nFemales who mated with virgin males were less likely to suffer genital damage compared to those who mated with sexually experienced males. It was suggested that factors contributing to male virgins being less harmful were ejaculate size and the amount of sperm contained.\n\nHermaphroditic gastropod snails mate using love darts. The love darts are described as a sharp \"stiletto,\" created by the males. The love darts are shot at the females during courtship. A single love dart is shot at a time, due to the lengthy process of regeneration. Snails of the genus \"Helix\" are model organisms for the study of love darts. It was observed that snails that rub against their mates, will forcefully place the love dart into their mate. It has been shown that though darts may aid in mating, they do not necessarily ensure mating success. However, love darts do in fact aid in mating success. Hermaphroditic snails will selectively take on a female or male role. Snails transmitted darts into these females so that they would store more sperm (about twice as much) compared to males who were not as successful. Males who successfully hit females with love darts had higher paternity assurance. Many snails inflicted with love darts suffer open wounds and sometimes death.\n\nForced copulation (sexual coercion) by males occurs in a wide range of species and may elicit behaviors such as aggression, harassment and grasping. In the time prior to or during copulation, females suffer detrimental effects due to forceful male mating tactics. Ultimately, females are forced to copulate against their will (a.k.a. \"rape\").\n\nHarassment is a behavior displayed during or prior to forced copulation. A male may follow the female at a distance in preparation to attack. In the Malabar ricefish \"Horaichthys setnai\" (Beloniformes), males harass females of interest from a distance. This behavior may consist of swimming below or behind the females, and even following them at a distance. When the male Malabar ricefish is ready to copulate, he dashes at high speed towards the female and release his club-shaped organ, the gonopodium also known as an anal fin. The purpose of the gonopodium is to deliver the spermatophore. The male takes his gonopodium and forcefully places it near the female genitalia. The sharp end of the spermatophore stabs the female's skin. As a result, the male is firmly attached to the female. Following this event, the male's spermatophore bursts, releasing sperm that travel towards the female's genital opening.\n\nForced copulation can lead to aggressive behaviors such as grasping. Males express grasping behaviors during the event of copulation with a desired female. Darwin (1871) described males with grasping qualities as having \"organs for prehension.\" His view was that males perform these aggressive behaviors in order to prevent the female from leaving or escaping. The purpose of male grasping devices is to increase the duration of copulation along with restricting females from other males. Grasping traits can also be considered as a way of males expressing mate-guarding. Examples of species with grasping traits are water striders and diving beetles.\n\nDuring forced copulation, male water striders (genus \"Gerris\") attack females. As a result, a struggle occurs because the female is resistant. When the male water strider is successfully attached to the female, the female carries the male during and after copulation. This can be energetically costly to the female because she has to support the heavy weight of the male at the same time as she is gliding on the water surface. The speed of the female is usually reduced by 20% when the male is attached. The purpose of long copulation is for the male to achieve paternity assurance in order to restrict the female from other males. Long periods of copulation can strongly affect females because females will depart from the water surface after mating and discontinue foraging. The duration of copulation can be extremely long. For water strider \"Aquarius najas\" it was a total of 3 months. For water strider \"Gerris lateralis\" the time ranged from 4 to 7 minutes.\n\nIn water strider \"Gerris odontogaster\", males have an abdominal clasping mechanism that grasps females in highly complex struggles before mating. Males that have clasps that are longer than those of other males were able to endure more somersaults by resistant females and achieved mating success. Males' genital structures had a particular shape to aid in female resistance.\n\nWater striders \"G. gracilicornis\" have a behavioral mechanism and grasping structures allowing grasping. Male water striders use what is called an \"intimidating courtship\". This mechanism involves males using a signal vibration to attract predators in order to manipulate females to mate. Females face more risks of being captured by predators since they idle on the water's surface for long periods of time. If a male were attached to the female, it would be less likely for the male to be harmed by the predators because he would be resting on top of the female. Therefore, males will tap their legs in order to create ripples in the water to attract predators. The female become fearful, causing her to be less resistant towards the male. As a result, copulation occurs faster, during which the male stops signaling. \n\nMale water striders \"Gerris odontogaster\" have grasping structures that can prolong copulation depending on the size of their abdominal processes. Males who had longer abdominal processes were able to restrain females longer than males who had shorter abdominal processes.\n\nIn diving beetles \"Dytiscidae\", males approach females in the water with a grasping mechanism before copulation. When this occurs, females repeatedly resist. Males evolved an anatomical advantage towards grasping. Males have a particular structure located on their tarsae that enhances grasping of female anatomical structures, pronotum and elytra, which are located on her dorsal surface.\n\nSexual cannibalism contradicts the traditional male-female relationship in terms of sexual conflict. Sexual cannibalism involves females slaying and consuming males during courtship or copulation, as in the interaction between male and female funnel-web spider (\"Hololena curta\").\n\nA possible explanation for sexual cannibalism occurring across taxa is \"paternal investment\". This means that females kill and consume males after sperm exchange in order to enhance the quality and number of her offspring. Male consumption by females serves as a blood meal since they volunteer their soma. The idea of \"paternal investment\" supports the concept of female choice because female spiders consume males in order to receive an increase in quality of offspring. Males may tap into female sensory biases that may influence female mate selection. Male gift-giving spiders are known to provide gifts to females in order to avoid being eaten. This is a tactic that males may use in order to manipulate females to not kill them. Females may have a strong, uncontrollable appetite, which males may use to their advantage by manipulating females through edible gifts.\n\nMales of several species of \"Heliconius\" butterflies, such as \"Heliconius melpomene\" and \"Heliconius erato\", have been found to transfer an antiaphrodisiac to the female during copulation. This compound is only produced in the male and is how males identify one another as male. Therefore, when it is transferred to the female, she then smells like a male. This prevents future males from attempting to copulate with her. While this behavior potentially benefits the female because harassment from males post mating has been found to decrease reproductive success by disturbing the production of eggs, its primary function is to increase the reproductive success of the male by ensuring that his sperm will be used to fertilize the egg.\n\nThe most well known examples of sexual conflict occur before and during mating, but conflicts of interest do not end once mating has happened. Initially there may be a conflict over female reproductive patterns such as reproductive rate, remating rate, and sperm utilization. In species with parental care, there may be a conflict over which sex provides care and the amount of care given to the offspring.\n\nCryptic female choice falls under the conflict in reproductive patterns. Cryptic female choice results from process that occurs after intromission which allows the female to preferentially fertilize or produce offspring with a particular male phenotype. It is thought that if the female's cryptic choice provides her with indirect genetic benefits in the form of more fit offspring, any male phenotype that limits female cryptic choice will induce a cost on the female. Often, cryptic female choice occurs in polyandrous or polygamous species.\n\nThe cricket species, \"Gryllus bimaculatus\", is a polygamous species. Multiple matings increases the hatching success of clutch of eggs which is hypothesized to be a result of increased chances of finding compatible sperm. Therefore, it is in the female's best interest to mate with multiple males to increase the offspring genetic fitness; however, males would prefer to sire more of the females' offspring and will try to prevent the female from having multiple matings by mate guarding to exclude rival males.\n\nSimilarly, the polyandrous species of spider \"Pisaura mirabilis\" has been demonstrated to have cryptic female choice. The presence of a nuptial gift by a male increases the proportion of sperm retained by the female (With copulation duration controlled for).\n\nParental investment is when either parent cares for eggs or offspring resulting in increased offspring fitness. Though intuitively one might assume that since providing care to offspring would provide indirect genetic benefits to both parents, there would not be much sexual conflict; however, since neither is interested in the other's genetic fitness, it is more beneficial to be selfish and push the costs of parental care onto the other sex. Therefore, each partner would exert selection on the other partner to provide more care, creating sexual conflict. Additionally, since it is beneficial for one partner to develop adaptations in parental care at the expense of the other, the other partner is likely evolve counter adaptations to avoid being exploited creating a situation to be predicted by game theory.\n\nIn the species \"Nicrophorus defodiens\", the burying beetle, there is biparental care; however, males of the species will resume releasing pheromones after mating with the primary female in order to attract more females to increase his reproductive output. However it is in the female's best interest if she can monopolize the male's parental care and food providence for her offspring. Therefore, the female will bite and attempt to push the male off his signaling perch and interfere with the male's secondary mating attempts in order to impose monogamy on the male.\n\nIn the species \"Remiz pendulinus\", the penduline tit, the male will build an elaborate nest and may or may not be joined by a female at any stage of construction. After eggs are laid, it is strictly uniparental incubation and offspring care; however, either parent may take the role of caregiver. Females will give care 50-70% of initiated breedings while males will give care 5-20% of the time, and approximately 30%-35% of the time, the eggs, which consist of four to five viable eggs, will be left to die, which is a considerable cost to both parents. However, being deserted also represents a large cost for the deserted parent. Therefore, timing of desertion becomes very important. Optimal timing for the males depends on the status of the clutch, and as a result the male frequently enters and remains near the nest during the egg laying period. For females it is important not to desert too early so that the male does not also desert the eggs, but also not too late else the male deserts before the female does. Females adapt by being very aggressive towards males that try to approach the nest as well as hiding one or more eggs so that males do not have full information on the clutch status.\n\nIn other species such as the Guianan cock-of-the-rock, as well as other lekking species, sexual conflict may not even manifest itself in parental care. The females of these species have the tendency to select males to mate with, become fertilized, and then raise the children in their own nests.\n\n\n\n", "id": "6778877", "title": "Sexual conflict"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21922", "text": "Neoteny\n\nNeoteny ( or , (also called juvenilization) is the delaying or slowing of the physiological (or somatic) development of an organism, typically an animal. Neoteny is found in modern humans. In progenesis (also called paedogenesis), sexual development is accelerated.\nBoth neoteny and progenesis result in paedomorphism (or paedomorphosis), a type of heterochrony. Some authors define paedomorphism as the retention of larval traits, as seen in salamanders.\n\nBoth neoteny and progenesis cause the retention in adults of traits previously seen only in the young. Such retention is important in evolutionary biology, domestication, and evolutionary developmental biology.\n\nThe origins of the concept of neoteny have been traced to the Bible (as argued by Ashley Montagu) and to the poet William Wordsworth's \"The Child is the father of the Man\" (as argued by Barry Bogin). The term itself was invented in 1885 by Julius Kollmann as he described the axolotl's maturation while remaining in a tadpole-like aquatic stage complete with gills, unlike other adult amphibians like frogs and toads.\n\nThe word \"neoteny\" is borrowed from the German \"Neotenie\", the latter constructed by Kollmann from the Greek νέος (\"neos\", \"young\") and τείνειν (\"teínein\", \"to stretch, to extend\"). The adjective is either \"neotenic\" or \"neotenous\". For the opposite of \"neotenic\", different authorities use either \"gerontomorphic\" or \"peramorphic\". Bogin points out that Kollmann had intended the meaning to be \"retaining youth\", but had evidently confused the Greek \"teínein\" with the Latin \"tenere\", which had the meaning he wanted, \"to retain\", so that the new word would mean \"the retaining of youth (into adulthood)\".\n\nIn 1926, Louis Bolk described neoteny as the major process in humanization. In his 1977 book \"Ontogeny and Phylogeny\", Steven Jay Gould noted that Bolk's account constituted an attempted justification for \"scientific\" racism and sexism, but acknowledged that Bolk had been right in the core idea that humans differ from other primates in becoming sexually mature in an infantile stage of body development.\n\nNeoteny in humans is the slowing or delaying of body development, compared to non-human primates, resulting in features such as a large head, a flat face, and relatively short arms and legs. These neotenic changes may have been brought about by sexual selection in human evolution. In turn, they may have permitted the development of human capacities such as emotional communication. However, humans also have relatively large noses and long legs, both peramorphic (not neotenic) traits. Some evolutionary theorists have proposed that neoteny was a key feature in human evolution. Gould argued that the \"evolutionary story\" of humans is one where we have been \"retaining to adulthood the originally juvenile features of our ancestors\". J. B. S. Haldane mirrors Gould's hypothesis by stating a \"major evolutionary trend in human beings\" is \"greater prolongation of childhood and retardation of maturity.\" Delbert D. Thiessen said that \"neoteny becomes more apparent as early primates evolved into later forms\" and that primates have been \"evolving toward flat face.\" However, in light of some groups using arguments based around neoteny to support racism, Gould also argued \"that the whole enterprise of ranking groups by degree of neoteny is fundamentally unjustified\" (Gould, 1996, pg. 150). Doug Jones argued that human evolution's trend toward neoteny may have been caused by sexual selection in human evolution for neotenous facial traits in women by men with the resulting neoteny in male faces being a \"by-product\" of sexual selection for neotenous female faces.\n\nNeoteny is seen in domesticated animals such as dogs and mice. This is because there are more resources available, less competition for those resources, and with the lowered competition the animals expend less energy obtaining those resources. This allows them to mature and reproduce more quickly than their wild counterparts. The environment that domesticated animals are raised in determines whether or not neoteny is present in those animals. Evolutionary neoteny can arise in a species when those conditions occur, and a species becomes sexually mature ahead of its \"normal development\". Another explanation for the neoteny in domesticated animals can be the selection for certain behavioral characteristics. Behavior is linked to genetics which therefore means that when a behavioral trait is selected for, a physical trait may also be selected for due to mechanisms like linkage disequilibrium. Often, juvenile behaviors are selected for in order to domesticate more easily a species; aggressiveness in certain species comes with adulthood when there is a need to compete for resources. If there is no need for competition, then there is no need for aggression. Selecting for juvenile behavioral characteristics can lead to neoteny in physical characteristics because, for example, with the reduced need for behaviors like aggression there is no need for developed traits that would help in that area. Traits that may become neotenized due to decreased aggression may be a shorter muzzle and smaller general size among the domesticated individuals. Some common neotenous physical traits in domesticated animals (mainly dogs, pigs, ferrets, cats, and even foxes) include: floppy ears, changes in reproductive cycle, curly tails, piebald coloration, fewer or shortened vertebra, large eyes, rounded forehead, large ears, and shortened muzzle.\n\nWhen the role of dogs expanded from just being working dogs to also being companions, humans started selective breeding dogs for morphological neoteny, and this selective breeding for \"neoteny or paedomorphism\" had the effect of enhancing the bond between humans and dogs. Humans bred dogs to have more \"juvenile physical traits\" as adults such as short snouts and wide-set eyes which are associated with puppies, because people usually consider these traits to be more attractive. Some breeds of dogs with short snouts and broad heads such as the Komondor, Saint Bernard and Maremma Sheepdog are more morphologically neotenous than other breeds of dogs.Cavalier King Charles spaniels are an example of selection for neoteny, because they exhibit large eyes, pendant-shaped ears and compact feet, giving them a morphology similar to puppies as adults.\n\nIn 2004, a study that used 310 wolf skulls and over 700 dog skulls representing 100 breeds concluded that the evolution of dog skulls can generally not be described by heterochronic processes such as neoteny although some pedomorphic dog breeds have skulls that resemble the skulls of juvenile wolves. By 2011, the finding by the same researcher was simply \"Dogs are not paedomorphic wolves.\"\n\nNeoteny has been observed in many other species. It is important to note the difference between partial and full neoteny when looking at other species in order to distinguish between juvenile traits that are only advantageous in the short term and traits that provide a benefit throughout the organism’s life; this might then provide some insight into the cause of neoteny in those species. Partial neoteny is the retention of the larval form beyond the usual age of maturation with the possibility of the development of sexual organs progenesis, but eventually the organism still matures into the adult form; this can be seen in \"Lithobates clamitans\". Full neoteny is seen in \"Ambystoma mexicanum\" and some populations of \"Ambystoma tigrinum\", which remain in their larval form for the duration of their life. \"Lithobates clamitans\" is partially neotenous: it delays its maturation through the winter season, because it is not advantageous for it to metamorphose into the adult form until there are more resources available: it can find those resources much more easily in the larval form. This would fall under both of the main causes of neoteny; the energy required to survive in the winter as a newly formed adult is too costly, so the organism exhibits neotenous characteristics until a time when it is capable of better survival as an adult. \"Ambystoma tigrinum\" retains its neotenous features for a similar reason, however the retention is permanent due to the lack of resources available throughout its lifetime. This is another example of an environmental cause of neoteny in that the species retains juvenile characteristics because the environment limits the ability of the organism to fully come into its adult form. A few species of birds show partial neoteny. A couple of examples of such species are the manakin birds \"Chiroxiphia linearis\" and \"Chiroxiphia caudata\". The males of both species retain their juvenile plumage into adulthood, but they eventually lose it once they are fully mature. In certain species of birds the retention of juvenile plumage is often linked to the molting times within each species. In order to ensure there is no overlap between the molting and mating times, the birds may show partial neoteny in regards to their plumage so that the males do not attain their bright adult plumage before the females are prepared to mate. In this instance, neoteny is present because there is no need for the males to molt early and it would be a waste of energy for them to try to mate while the females are still immature.\n\nNeoteny is commonly seen in flightless insects like the females in the order Strepsiptera. The flightless trait in insects has evolved many separate times; environments that may have contributed to the separate evolution of this trait are: high altitudes, isolation on islands, and insects that reside in colder climates. These environmental factors may be responsible for the flightless trait, because in these situations it would be disadvantageous to have a population that is more dispersed, so flightlessness would be favored due to the boundaries it poses to dispersal. Also, in cooler temperatures heat is lost more rapidly through wings, thus the circumstance favors flightlessness. Another couple of main points to note about insects are that the females in certain groups become sexually mature without metamorphosing into adulthood, and some insects which grow up in certain conditions do not ever develop wings. Flightlessness in some female insects has been linked to higher fecundity, this would increase the fitness of the individual because the female is producing more offspring and therefore passing on more of her genes. In those instances, neoteny occurs because it is more advantageous for the females to remain flightless in order to conserve energy which thereby increases their fecundity. Aphids are a great example of insects that may never develop wings due to their environmental setting. If resources are abundant there is no need to grow wings and disperse. When the nutrition of a host plant is abundant, aphids may not grow wings, remaining on the host plant for the duration of their lives; however, if the resources become diminished, their offspring may develop wings in order to disperse to other host plants.\n\nTwo common environments that tend to favor neoteny are high-altitude and cool environments because neotenous individuals have a higher fitness than those that metamorphose into the adult form. This is because the energy required for metamorphosis is too costly for the individual’s fitness, also the conditions favor neoteny due to the ability of neotenous individuals to utilize the available resources more easily. This trend can be seen in the comparison of salamander species of lower and higher altitudes. The neotenous individuals have higher survivorship as well as higher fecundity than the salamanders that had gone to the adult form in the higher altitude and cooler environment. Insects in cooler environments tend to show neoteny in flight because wings have a high surface area and lose heat quickly, thus it is not advantageous for insects in that environment to metamorphose into adults.\n\nMany species of salamander, and amphibians in general, are known to have neotenized characteristics because of the environment they live in. Axolotl and olm are species of salamander that retains their juvenile aquatic form throughout adulthood, examples of full neoteny. Gills are a common juvenile characteristic in amphibians that are kept after maturation; an example of this would be a comparison of the tiger salamander and the rough-skinned newt, both of which retain gills into adulthood.\n\nPygmy chimpanzees (bonobos) share many physical characteristics with humans. A prime example are their neotenous skulls. The shape of their skull does not change into adulthood; it only increases in size. This is due to sexual dimorphism and an evolutionary change in timing of development. Juveniles became sexually mature before their bodies had fully developed into adulthood, and due to some selective advantage the neotenic structure of the skull remained in later generations.\n\nIn some species, energy costs result in neoteny, as in the insect families Gerridae, Delphacidae, and Carabidae. Many of the species in these families have smaller, neotenous wings or no wings at all. Similarly, some cricket species shed their wings in adulthood, while in beetles of the genus \"Ozopemon\", the males (thought to be the first example of neoteny in the Coleoptera) are significantly smaller than the females, through inbreeding. In the termite \"Kalotermes flavicollis\",neoteny is seen in females during molting.\n\nIn other species, environmental conditions cause neoteny, as in the northwestern salamander (\"Ambystoma gracile\"), where higher altitude is correlated with greater neotenic tendencies, perhaps to help conserve energy as mentioned above. Similarly, neoteny is found in a few species of the crustacean family Ischnomesidae, which live in deep ocean waters.\n\n\n", "id": "21922", "title": "Neoteny"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2507552", "text": "Microchimerism\n\nMicrochimerism is the presence of a small number of cells that originate from another individual and are therefore genetically distinct from the cells of the host individual. This phenomenon may be related to certain types of autoimmune diseases; however, the mechanisms responsible for this relationship are unclear.\n\nIn humans (and perhaps in all placentals), the most common form is fetomaternal microchimerism (also known as \"fetal cell microchimerism\" or \"fetal chimerism\") whereby cells from a fetus pass through the placenta and establish cell lineages within the mother. Fetal cells have been documented to persist and multiply in the mother for several decades. The exact phenotype of these cells is unknown, although several different cell types have been identified, such as various immune lineages, mesenchymal stem cells, and placental-derived cells. A 2012 study at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, has detected cells with the Y chromosome in multiple areas of the brains of deceased women.\n\nFetomaternal microchimerism occurs during pregnancy and shortly after giving birth for most women. However, not all women who have had children contain fetal cells. Studies suggest that fetomaternal microchimerism could be influenced by killer-cell immunoglobin-like (KIR) ligands. Lymphocytes also influence the development of persisting fetomaternal microchimerism since natural killer cells compose about 70% of lymphocytes in the first trimester of pregnancy. KIR patterns on maternal natural killer cells of the mother and KIR ligands on the fetal cells could have an effect on fetomaternal microchimerism. In one study, mothers with KIR2DS1 exhibited higher levels of fetomaternal microchimerism compared to mothers who were negative for this activating KIR.\n\nThe potential health consequences of these cells are unknown. One hypothesis is that these fetal cells might trigger a graft-versus-host reaction leading to autoimmune disease. This offers a potential explanation for why many autoimmune diseases are more prevalent in middle-aged women. Another hypothesis is that fetal cells home to injured or diseased maternal tissue where they act as stem cells and participate in repair. It is also possible that the fetal cells are merely innocent bystanders and have no effect on maternal health.\n\nAfter giving birth, about 50–75% of women carry fetal immune cell lines. Maternal immune cells are also found in the offspring yielding in maternal→fetal microchimerism, though this phenomenon is about half as frequent as the former.\n\nMicrochimerism had also been shown to exist after blood transfusions to a severely immunocompromised population of patients who suffered trauma.\n\nOther possible sources of microchimerism include gestation, an individual's older sibling, twin sibling, or vanished twin, with the cells being received in utero. Fetal-maternal microchimerism is especially prevalent after abortion or miscarriage. It is hypothesized that unprotected intercourse with ejaculation may be another source of microchimerism.\n\nMicrochimerism occurs in most pairs of twins in cattle. In cattle (and other bovines), the placentae of fraternal twins usually fuse and the twins share blood circulation, resulting in exchange of cell lines. If the twins are a male-female pair, the male hormones from the bull calf have the effect of partially masculinising the heifer (female), creating a \"martin heifer\" or \"freemartin\". Freemartins appear female, but are infertile and so cannot be used for breeding or dairy production. Microchimerism provides a method of diagnosing the condition, because male genetic material can be detected in a blood sample.\n\nMicrochimerism has been implicated in autoimmune diseases. Independent studies repeatedly suggested that microchimeric cells of fetal origin may be involved in the pathogenesis of systemic sclerosis. Moreover, microchimeric cells of maternal origin may be involved in the pathogenesis of a group of autoimmune diseases found in children, i.e. juvenile idiopathic inflammatory myopathies (one example would be juvenile dermatomyositis). Microchimerism has now been further implicated in other autoimmune diseases, including systemic lupus erythematosus. Contrarily, an alternative hypothesis on the role of microchimeric cells in lesions is that they may be facilitating tissue repair of the damaged organ.\n\nMoreover, fetal immune cells have also been frequently found in breast cancer stroma as compared to samples taken from healthy women. It is not clear, however, whether fetal cell lines promote the development of tumors or, contrarily, protect women from developing breast carcinoma.\n\nThe presence of fetal cells in mothers can be associated with benefits when it comes to certain autoimmune diseases. In particular, male fetal cells are related to helping mothers with systemic lupus erythematosus. When kidney biopsies were taken from patients with lupus nephritis, DNA was extracted and run with PCR. The male fetal DNA was quantified and the presence of specific Y chromosome sequences were found. Women with lupus nephritis containing male fetal cells in their kidney biopsies exhibited better renal system functioning. Levels of serum creatinine, which is related to kidney failure, were low in mothers with high levels of male fetal cells. In contrast, women without male fetal cells who had lupus nephritis showed a more serious form of glomerulonephritis and higher levels of serum creatinine.\n\nThe specific role that fetal cells play in microchimerism related to certain autoimmune diseases is not fully understood. However, one hypothesis states that these cells supply antigens, causing inflammation and triggering the release of different foreign antigens. This would trigger autoimmune disease instead of serving as a therapeutic. A different hypothesis states that fetal microchimeric cells are involved in repairing tissues. When tissues get inflamed, fetal microchimeric cells go to the damaged site and aid in repair and regeneration of the tissue.\n\nFetal maternal microchimerism may be related to autoimmune thyroid diseases. There have been reports of fetal cells in the lining of the blood and thyroid glands of patients with autoimmune thyroid disease. These cells could become activated after delivery of the baby after immune suppression in the mother is lost, suggesting a role of fetal cells in the pathogenesis of such diseases. Two types of thyroid disease, Hashimoto’s Thyroiditis (HT) and Graves’ Disease (GD) show similarities to graft vs host disease which occurs after hematopoietic stem cell transplants. Fetal cells colonize maternal tissues like the thyroid gland and are able to survive many years postpartum. These fetal microchimeric cells in the thyroid show up in the blood of women affected by thyroid diseases.\n\nFetomaternal microchimerism has been shown in experimental investigations of whether fetal cells can cross the blood brain barrier in mice. The properties of these cells allow them to cross the blood brain barrier and target injured brain tissue. This mechanism is possible because umbilical cord blood cells express some proteins similar to neurons. When these umbilical cord blood cells are injected in rats with brain injury or stroke, they enter the brain and express certain nerve cell markers. Due to this process, fetal cells could enter the brain during pregnancy and become differentiated into neural cells. Fetal microchimerism can occur in the maternal mouse brain, responding to certain cues in the maternal body.\n\nFetal microchimerism could have an implication on maternal health. Isolating cells in cultures can alter the properties of the stem cells, but in pregnancy the effects of fetal stem cells can be investigated without in vitro cultures. Once characterized and isolated, fetal cells that are able to cross the blood brain barrier could impact certain procedures. For example, isolating stem cells can be accomplished through taking them from sources like the umbilical cord. These fetal stem cells can be used in intravenous infusion to repair the brain tissue. Hormonal changes in pregnancy alter neurogenesis, which could create favorable environments for fetal cells to respond to injury.\n\nThe true function on fetal cells in mothers is not fully known, however, there have been reports of positive and negative health effects. The sharing of genes between the fetus and mother may lead to benefits. Due to not all genes being shared, health complications may arise as a result of resource allocation. During pregnancy, fetal cells are able to manipulate the maternal system to draw resources from the placenta, while the maternal system tries to limit it.\n\n\n", "id": "2507552", "title": "Microchimerism"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10375639", "text": "Maternal effect dominant embryonic arrest\n\nMaternal effect dominant embryonic arrest (Medea) is a selfish gene composed of a toxin and an antidote. A mother carrying \"Medea\" will express the toxin in her germline, killing her progeny. If the children also carry \"Medea\", they produce copies of the antidote, saving their lives. Therefore, if a mother has one \"Medea\" allele and one non-Medea allele, half of her children will inherit \"Medea\" and survive while the other half will inherit the non-Medea allele and die (unless they receive \"Medea\" from their father).\n\nMedea's selfish behavior gives it a selective advantage over normal genes. If introduced into a population at sufficiently high levels, the \"Medea\" gene will spread, replacing entire populations of normal beetles with beetles carrying \"Medea\". Because of this, \"Medea\" has been proposed as a way of genetically modifying insect populations. By linking the \"Medea\" construct to a gene of interest - for instance, a gene conferring resistance to malaria - \"Medea\"'s unique dynamics could be exploited to drive both genes into a population. These findings have dramatic implications for the control of insect-borne diseases such as malaria and dengue fever.\n\nMedea, which has been found in nature only in flour beetles, is the only selfish gene that has been simulated in the lab and tested in the fruit fly \"Drosophila melanogaster\". The toxin was a microRNA that blocked the expression of \"myd88\", a gene vital for embryonic development in insects. The antidote was an extra copy of \"myd88\". The offspring receiving the extra copy of \"myd88\" survived and hatched, while those without the extra copy died. In lab trials where 25% of the original members were homozygous for \"Medea\", the gene spread to the entire population within 10 to 12 generations.\n\nMedea was named for the Greek mythological figure of Medea, who killed her children when her husband left her for another woman.\n\n\n", "id": "10375639", "title": "Maternal effect dominant embryonic arrest"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2998760", "text": "Facilitated variation\n\nFacilitated variation is a theory presented in 2005 by Marc W. Kirschner, a professor and chair at the Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School, and John C. Gerhart, a professor at the Graduate School, University of California, Berkeley.\n\nThe theory of facilitated variation addresses the nature and function of variation in evolution. Recent advances in cellular and evolutionary developmental biology shed light on a number of mechanisms for generating novelty. While the concept and mechanism of natural selection is well understood, the variation component of the evolutionary theory remains underdeveloped. Variation mechanisms such as mutations, genetic drift, and genetic flow have been studied and documented thoroughly. The theory of facilitated variation is an effort to illustrate that seemingly complex biological systems can arise with a limited number of genes, and a limited number of variation mechanisms.\n\nThis is accomplished by exploring the relation between the genotype and phenotype, specifically:\n\n\nThe theory consists of several elements. Organisms have 'constrained' and 'deconstrained' variations of their phenotype. The constrained processes remain mostly unchanged but they allow 'deconstrained' processes to alter the phenotype without resulting in lethality. The constrained elements are called \"conserved core processes\" that remain in stasis for perhaps millions of years and they endure little if any changes. These core processes, such as the processing of DNA and RNA, are created in rapid 'invention' periods (e.g. from prokaryotes to eukaryotes), and are shared by all organisms. The 'deconstrained' processes are those that change the amount, time, kind, and place of gene expression. The 'conserved core processes' are linked via weak regulatory linkage, which is a loose mechanism for signal transcription. This mechanism facilitates new changes in how genes are expressed, thereby leading to variations in the phenotype which are selected upon. Furthermore, changes and combinations of these weak permissive signals can give rise to new novel functions on the structural and molecular level. Exploratory processes have the ability to generate many different phenotypical outcomes or states given a limited number of genes. A few of these states are selected for their physiological adaptability in their respective environmental conditions. For example, the vascular system expands to regions with insufficient oxygen supply. There is no predetermined genetical map for the distribution of blood vessels in the body, but the vascular system responds to signals from hypoxic tissues. Exploratory processes are powerful because they provide organisms with a tremendous scope for adaptation.\n\nIn the classical Darwinian view, a large number of successive mutations, each selected for its usefulness to the survival of the organism, is required to produce novel structures such as wings, limbs, or the brain. Alternatively, facilitated variation asserts that the physiological adaptability of core processes and properties such as weak linkage and exploratory processes enable proteins, cells, and body structures to interact in numerous ways that can lead to the creation of novelty with a limited number of genes, and a limited number of mutations.\n\nTherefore, the role of mutations is often to change how, where, and when the genes are expressed during the development of the embryo and adult.\n\nThe theory challenges irreducible complexity by explaining how mutation can cause unusual changes within a species. They explain how the individual organism can change from a passive target of natural selection, to a central player in the 3-billion-year history of evolution. Kirschner and Gerhart's theory also provides a scientific rebuttal to modern critics of evolution who champion \"intelligent design\".\n\n\n\n", "id": "2998760", "title": "Facilitated variation"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23014621", "text": "Homo consumericus\n\nHomo consumericus (mock Latin for consumerist person) is a neologism used in the social sciences, notably by Gad Saad in his book \"The Evolutionary Bases of Consumption\" and by Gilles Lipovetsky in \"Le Bonheur Paradoxal\". According to these and other scholars the phenomenon of mass consumption could be compared to certain traits of human psychology described by evolutionary scientists pointing out similarities between Darwinian principles and consumer behaviour. Lipovetsky has noted that modern times have brought about the rise of a \"third\" type of \"Homo consumericus,\" who is unpredictable and insatiable.\n\nA similar expression \"Homo Consumens\" was used by Erich Fromm in \"Socialist Humanism\" , written in 1965.\n\n", "id": "23014621", "title": "Homo consumericus"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20847621", "text": "Universal Darwinism\n\nUniversal Darwinism (also known as generalized Darwinism, universal selection theory,\nor Darwinian metaphysics) refers to a variety of approaches that extend the theory of Darwinism beyond its original domain of biological evolution on Earth. Universal Darwinism aims to formulate a generalized version of the mechanisms of variation, selection and heredity proposed by Charles Darwin, so that they can apply to explain evolution in a wide variety of other domains, including psychology, economics, culture, medicine, computer science and physics.\n\nAt the most fundamental level, Charles Darwin's theory of evolution states that organisms evolve and adapt to their environment by an iterative process. This process can be conceived as an evolutionary algorithm that searches the space of possible forms (the fitness landscape) for the ones that are best adapted. The process has three components:\n\n\nAfter those fit variants are retained, they can again undergo variation, either directly or in their offspring, starting a new round of the iteration. The overall mechanism is similar to the problem-solving procedures of trial-and-error or generate-and-test: evolution can be seen as searching for the best solution for the problem of how to survive and reproduce by generating new trials, testing how well they perform, eliminating the failures, and retaining the successes.\n\nThe generalization made in \"universal\" Darwinism is to replace \"organism\" by any recognizable pattern, phenomenon, or system. The first requirement is that the pattern can \"survive\" (maintain, be retained) long enough or \"reproduce\" (replicate, be copied) sufficiently frequently so as not to disappear immediately. This is the heredity component: the information in the pattern must be retained or passed on. The second requirement is that during survival and reproduction variation (small changes in the pattern) can occur. The final requirement is that there is a selective \"preference\" so that certain variants tend to survive or reproduce \"better\" than others. If these conditions are met, then, by the logic of natural selection, the pattern will evolve towards more adapted forms.\n\nExamples of patterns that have been postulated to undergo variation and selection, and thus adaptation, are genes, ideas (memes), theories, technologies, neurons and their connections, words, computer programs, firms, antibodies, institutions, law and judicial systems, quantum states and even whole universes.\n\nConceptually, \"evolutionary theorizing about cultural, social, and economic phenomena\" preceded Darwin, but was still lacking the concept of natural selection. Darwin himself, together with subsequent 19th century thinkers such as Herbert Spencer, Thorstein Veblen, James Mark Baldwin and William James, was quick to apply the idea of selection to other domains, such as language, psychology, society, and culture. However, this evolutionary tradition was largely banned from the social sciences in the beginning of the 20th century, in part because of the bad reputation of social Darwinism, an attempt to use Darwinism to justify social inequality.\n\nStarting in the 1950s, Donald T. Campbell was one of the first and most influential authors to revive the tradition, and to formulate a generalized Darwinian algorithm directly applicable to phenomena outside of biology. In this, he was inspired by William Ross Ashby's view of self-organization and intelligence as fundamental processes of selection. His aim was to explain the development of science and other forms of knowledge by focusing on the variation and selection of ideas and theories, thus laying the basis for the domain of evolutionary epistemology. In the 1990s, Campbell's formulation of the mechanism of \"blind-variation-and-selective-retention\" (BVSR) was further developed and extended to other domains under the labels of \"universal selection theory\" or \"universal selectionism\" by his disciples Gary Cziko, Mark Bickhard, and Francis Heylighen.\n\nRichard Dawkins may have first coined the term \"universal Darwinism\" in 1983 to describe his conjecture that any possible life forms existing outside the solar system would evolve by natural selection just as they do on Earth. This conjecture was also presented in 1983 in a paper entitled “The Darwinian Dynamic” that dealt with the evolution of order in living systems and certain nonliving physical systems. It was suggested “that ‘life’, wherever it might exist in the universe, evolves according to the same dynamical law” termed the Darwinian dynamic. Henry Plotkin in his 1997 book on Darwin machines makes the link between universal Darwinism and Campbell's evolutionary epistemology. Susan Blackmore, in her 1999 book \"The Meme Machine\", devotes a chapter titled 'Universal Darwinism' to a discussion of the applicability of the Darwinian process to a wide range of scientific subject matters.\n\nThe philosopher of mind Daniel Dennett, in his 1995 book \"Darwin's Dangerous Idea\", developed the idea of a Darwinian process, involving variation, selection and retention, as a generic algorithm that is substrate-neutral and could be applied to many fields of knowledge outside of biology. He described the idea of natural selection as a \"universal acid\" that cannot be contained in any vessel, as it seeps through the walls and spreads ever further, touching and transforming ever more domains. He notes in particular the field of memetics in the social sciences.\n\nIn agreement with Dennett's prediction, over the past decades the Darwinian perspective has spread ever more widely, in particular across the social sciences as the foundation for numerous schools of study including memetics, evolutionary economics, evolutionary psychology, evolutionary anthropology, neural Darwinism, and evolutionary linguistics. Researchers have postulated Darwinian processes as operating at the foundations of physics, cosmology and chemistry via the theories of quantum Darwinism, observation selection effects and cosmological natural selection. Similar mechanisms are extensively applied in computer science in the domains of genetic algorithms and evolutionary computation, which develop solutions to complex problems via a process of variation and selection.\n\nOne of the most all-encompassing accounts of Universal Darwinism is provided by author D. B. Kelley in his 2013 book The Origin of Everything via Universal Selection, or the Preservation of Favored Systems in Contention for Existence. While Darwin maintained that natural selection, at its true foundations, is nothing more than survival of the fittest, Kelley expounds upon the notion that it ultimately involves the survival of the fittest systems, or phenomena. He also generalizes, or further reduces, survival of the fittest to what he calls \"preservation of the stable.\" He argues that all stable entities are products of this unremitting principle, as selection is the driving evolutionary mechanism behind not only species but all natural phenomena. Just as evolution is continuous, selection too is continuous, forever acting upon all of the many systems to have unfolded chronologically throughout history. Kelley thus applies selection to everything from quantum physics to chemistry, biology, geology and astronomy, addressing many of the most significant contributions to Universal Darwinism by scientists in each of these fields and more.\n\nThe following approaches can all be seen as exemplifying a generalization of Darwinian ideas outside of their original domain of biology. These \"Darwinian extensions\" can be grouped in two categories, depending on whether they discuss implications of biological (genetic) evolution in other disciplines (e.g. medicine or psychology), or discuss processes of variation and selection of entities other than genes (e.g. computer programs, firms or ideas). However, there is no strict separation possible, since most of these approaches (e.g. in sociology, psychology and linguistics) consider both genetic and non-genetic (e.g. cultural) aspects of evolution, as well as the interactions between them (see e.g. gene-culture coevolution).\n\n\n\n\n", "id": "20847621", "title": "Universal Darwinism"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1034339", "text": "Most recent common ancestor\n\nIn biology and genealogy, the most recent common ancestor (MRCA, also \"last common ancestor\" LCA, or \"concestor\") of any set of organisms is the most recent individual from which all organisms in a group are directly descended. The term is also used in reference to the ancestry of groups of genes (haplotypes) rather than organisms.\n\nThe MRCA of a set of individuals can sometimes be determined by referring to an established pedigree. However, in general, it is impossible to identify the exact MRCA of a large set of individuals, but an estimate of the time at which the MRCA lived can often be given. Such \"time to MRCA\" (TMRCA) estimates can be given based on DNA test results and established mutation rates as practiced in genetic genealogy, or by reference to a non-genetic, mathematical model or computer simulation. \n\nIn organisms using sexual reproduction, the \"matrilinear MRCA\" and \"patrilinear MRCA\" are the MRCAs of a given population considering only matrilineal and patrilineal descent, respectively. The MRCA of a population by definition cannot be older than either its matrilinear or its patrilinear MRCA.\nIn the case of \"Homo sapiens\", the matrilinear and patrilinear MRCA are also known as \"Mitochondrial Eve\" (mt-MRCA) and \"Y-chromosomal Adam\" (Y-MRCA) respectively.\n\nThe age of the human MRCA is unknown. It is necessarily younger than the age of both Y-MRCA and mt-MRCA, estimated at around 200,000 years, and it may be as recent as some 3,000 years ago.\n\nThe Last Universal Common Ancestor (LUCA) is the most recent common ancestor of all current life on Earth, estimated to have lived some 3.5 to 3.8 billion years ago (in the Paleoarchean).\n\nThe project of a complete description of the phylogeny of biological species is dubbed the \"Tree of Life\". This involves time estimates of all known speciation events; for example, the MRCA of all Carnivora (i.e. the MRCA of \"cats and dogs\") is estimated to have lived of the order of 42 million years ago (Miacidae). \n\nThe concept of the last common ancestor from the perspective of human evolution is described for a popular audience in \"The Ancestor's Tale\" by Richard Dawkins (2004). Dawkins lists \"concestors\" of the human lineage in order of increasing age, including hominin (human-chimpanzee), hominine (human-gorilla), hominid (human-orangutan), hominoid (human-gibbon), and so on in 39 stages in total, down to the last universal ancestor (human-bacteriae).\n\nIt is also possible to consider the ancestry of individual genes (or groups of genes, haplotypes) instead of an organism as a whole. \nCoalescent theory describes a stochastic model of how the ancestry of such genetic markers maps to the history of a population.\n\nUnlike organisms, a gene is passed down from a generation of organisms to the next generation either as perfect replicas of itself or as slightly mutated \"descendant genes\". While organisms have ancestry graphs and progeny graphs via sexual reproduction, a gene has a single chain of ancestors and a tree of descendants. An organism produced by sexual cross-fertilization (allogamy) has at least two ancestors (its immediate parents), but a gene always has one ancestor per generation.\n\nMitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is nearly immune to sexual mixing, unlike the nuclear DNA whose chromosomes are shuffled and recombined in Mendelian inheritance. Mitochondrial DNA, therefore, can be used to trace matrilineal inheritance and to find the Mitochondrial Eve (also known as the \"African Eve\"), the most recent common ancestor of all humans via the mitochondrial DNA pathway.\n\nLikewise, Y chromosome is present as a single sex chromosome in the male individual and is passed on to male descendants without recombination. It can be used to trace patrilineal inheritance and to find the Y-chromosomal Adam, the most recent common ancestor of all humans via the Y-DNA pathway.\n\nMitochondrial Eve and Y-chromosomal Adam have been established by researchers using genealogical DNA tests. Mitochondrial Eve is estimated to have lived about 200,000 years ago. A paper published in March 2013 determined that, with 95% confidence and that provided there are no systematic errors in the study's data, Y-chromosomal Adam lived between 237,000 and 581,000 years ago.\n\nThe MRCA of humans alive today would, therefore, need to have lived more recently than either.\n\nIt is more complicated to infer human ancestry via autosomal chromosomes. Although an autosomal chromosome contains genes that are passed down from parents to children via independent assortment from only one of the two parents, genetic recombination (chromosomal crossover) mixes genes from non-sister chromatids from both parents during meiosis, thus changing the genetic composition of the chromosome.\n\nDifferent types of MRCAs are estimated to have lived at different times in the past. These \"time to MRCA\" (TMRCA) estimates are also computed differently depending on the type of MRCA being considered. Patrilineal and matrilineal MRCAs (Mitochondrial Eve and Y-chromosomal Adam) are traced by single gene markers, thus their TMRCA are computed based on DNA test results and established mutation rates as practiced in genetic genealogy. Time to genealogical MRCA of all living humans is computed based on non-genetic, mathematical models and computer simulations.\n\nSince Mitochondrial Eve and Y-chromosomal Adam are traced by single genes via a single ancestral parent line, the time to these genetic MRCAs will necessarily be greater than that for the genealogical MRCA. This is because single genes will coalesce more slowly than tracing of conventional human genealogy via both parents. The latter considers only individual humans, without taking into account whether any gene from the computed MRCA actually survives in every single person in the current population.\n\nMitochondrial DNA can be used to trace the ancestry of a set of populations. In this case, populations are defined by the accumulation of mutations on the mtDNA, and special trees are created for the mutations and the order in which they occurred in each population. The tree is formed through the testing of a large number of individuals all over the world for the presence or lack of a certain set of mutations. Once this is done it is possible to determine how many mutations separate one population from another. The number of mutations, together with estimated mutation rate of the mtDNA in the regions tested, allows scientists to determine the approximate time to MRCA (TMRCA) which indicates time passed since the populations last shared the same set of mutations or belonged to the same haplogroup.\n\nIn the case of Y-Chromosomal DNA, TMRCA is arrived at in a different way. Y-DNA haplogroups are defined by single-nucleotide polymorphism in various regions of the Y-DNA. The time to MRCA within a haplogroup is defined by the accumulation of mutations in STR sequences of the Y-Chromosome of that haplogroup only. Y-DNA network analysis of Y-STR haplotypes showing a non-star cluster indicates Y-STR variability due to multiple founding individuals. Analysis yielding a star cluster can be regarded as representing a population descended from a single ancestor. In this case the variability of the Y-STR sequence, also called the microsatellite variation, can be regarded as a measure of the time passed since the ancestor founded this particular population. The descendants of Genghis Khan or one of his ancestors represents a famous star cluster that can be dated back to the time of Genghis Khan.\n\nTMRCA calculations are considered critical evidence when attempting to determine migration dates of various populations as they spread around the world. For example, if a mutation is deemed to have occurred 30,000 years ago, then this mutation should be found amongst all populations that diverged after this date. If archeological evidence indicates cultural spread and formation of regionally isolated populations then this must be reflected in the isolation of subsequent genetic mutations in this region. If genetic divergence and regional divergence coincide it can be concluded that the observed divergence is due to migration as evidenced by the archaeological record. However, if the date of genetic divergence occurs at a different time than the archaeological record, then scientists will have to look at alternate archaeological evidence to explain the genetic divergence. The issue is best illustrated in the debate surrounding the demic diffusion versus cultural diffusion during the European Neolithic.\n\nThe age of the MRCA of all living humans is unknown. It is necessarily younger than the age of either the matrilinear or the patrilinear MRCA, both of which have an estimated age of between roughly 100,000 and 200,000 years ago.\nDue to pervasive contact between the formerly separated human populations since the Age of Discovery, the human MRCA may be as recent as some 3,000 years ago.\n\nNote that the age of the MRCA of a population does not correspond to a population bottleneck, let alone a \"first couple\". It rather reflects the presence of a single individual with high reproductive success in the past, whose genetic contribution has become pervasive throughout the population over time. \nE.g. it is estimated that the MRCA of the populations native to Europe, or even much of Eurasia, is medieval, more specifically, due to the Mongol invasions in the 13th century.\n\nIt is also incorrect to assume that the MRCA passed all, or indeed any, genetic information to every living person. Through sexual reproduction, an ancestor passes half of his or her genes to each descendant in the next generation; after more than 32 generations the contribution of a single ancestor would be on the order of 2, a number proportional to less than a single basepair within the human genome.\n\nThe MRCA is the most recent \"common\" ancestor shared by all individuals in the population under consideration. This MRCA may well have contemporaries who are also ancestral to some but not all of the extant population. The \"identical ancestors point\" is a point in the past more remote than the MRCA at which time there are no longer organisms which are ancestral to some but not all of the modern population. \nDue to pedigree collapse, modern individuals may still exhibit clustering, due to vastly different contributions from each of ancestral population .\n\n", "id": "1034339", "title": "Most recent common ancestor"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=584238", "text": "Cladogenesis\n\nCladogenesis is an evolutionary splitting event where a parent species splits into two distinct species, forming a clade.\n\nThis event usually occurs when a few organisms end up in new, often distant areas or when environmental changes cause several extinctions, opening up ecological niches for the survivors. The events that cause these species to originally separate from each other over distant areas may still allow both of the species to have equal chances of surviving, reproducing, and even evolving to better suit their environments while still being two distinct species.\n\nCladogenesis is in contrast to anagenesis, in which an ancestral species gradually accumulates change, and eventually, when enough is accumulated, the species is sufficiently distinct and different enough from its original starting form that it can be labeled as a new form - a new species. Note that with anagenesis the lineage in a phylogenetic tree does not split.\n\nTo determine whether a speciation event is cladogenesis or anagenesis, researchers may use simulation, evidence from fossils, molecular evidence from the DNA of different living species, or modelling. It has however been debated whether the distinction between cladogenesis and anagenesis is necessary at all in evolutionary theory.\n\n\n", "id": "584238", "title": "Cladogenesis"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12845111", "text": "Genetic erosion\n\nGenetic erosion is a process where the limited gene pool of an endangered species diminishes even more when reproductive individuals die off before reproducing low population. The term is sometimes used in a narrow sense, such as when describing the loss of particular alleles or genes, as well as being used more broadly, as when referring to the loss of a phenotype or whole species.\n\nGenetic erosion occurs because each individual organism has many unique genes which get lost when it dies without getting a chance to breed. Low genetic diversity in a population of wild animals and plants leads to a further diminishing gene pool – inbreeding and a weakening immune system can then \"fast-track\" that species towards eventual extinction.\n\nBy definition, endangered species suffer varying degrees of genetic erosion. Many species benefit from a human-assisted breeding program to keep their population viable, thereby avoiding extinction over long time-frames. Small populations are more susceptible to genetic erosion than larger populations. \n\nGenetic erosion gets compounded and accelerated by habitat loss and habitat fragmentation – many endangered species are threatened by habitat loss and (fragmentation) habitat. Fragmented habitat create barriers in gene flow between populations. \n\nThe gene pool of a species or a population is the complete set of unique alleles that would be found by inspecting the genetic material of every living member of that species or population. A large gene pool indicates extensive genetic diversity, which is associated with robust populations that can survive bouts of intense selection. Meanwhile, low genetic diversity (see inbreeding and population bottlenecks) can cause reduced biological fitness and increase the chance of extinction of that species or population.\n\nPopulation bottlenecks create shrinking gene pools, which leave fewer and fewer fertile mating partners. The genetic implications can be illustrated by considering the analogy of a high-stakes poker game with a crooked dealer. Consider that the game begins with a 52-card deck (representing high genetic diversity). Reduction of the number of breeding pairs with unique genes resembles the situation where the dealer deals only the same five cards over and over, producing only a few limited \"hands\".\n\nAs specimens begin to inbreed, both physical and reproductive congenital effects and defects appear more often. Abnormal sperm increases, infertility rises, and birthrates decline. \"Most perilous are the effects on the immune defense systems, which become weakened and less and less able to fight off an increasing number of bacterial, viral, fungal, parasitic, and other disease-producing threats. Thus, even if an endangered species in a bottleneck can withstand whatever human development may be eating away at its habitat, it still faces the threat of an epidemic that could be fatal to the entire population.\"\n\nGenetic erosion in agricultural and livestock is the loss of biological genetic diversity – including the loss of individual genes, and the loss of particular recombinants of genes (or gene complexes) – such as those manifested in locally adapted landraces of domesticated animals or plants that have become adapted to the natural environment in which they originated.\n\nThe major driving forces behind genetic erosion in crops are variety replacement, land clearing, overexploitation of species, population pressure, environmental degradation, overgrazing, governmental policy, and changing agricultural systems. The main factor, however, is the replacement of local varieties of domestic plants and animals by other varieties or species that are non-local. A large number of varieties can also often be dramatically reduced when commercial varieties are introduced into traditional farming systems. Many researchers believe that the main problem related to agro-ecosystem management is the general tendency towards genetic and ecological uniformity imposed by the development of modern agriculture.\n\nWith advances in modern bioscience, several techniques and safeguards have emerged to check the relentless advance of genetic erosion and the resulting acceleration of endangered species towards eventual extinction. However, many of these techniques and safeguards are too expensive yet to be practical, and so the best way to protect species is to protect their habitat and to let them live in it as naturally as possible.\n\nWildlife sanctuaries and national parks have been created to preserve entire ecosystems with all the web of species native to the area. Wildlife corridors are created to join fragmented habitats (see Habitat fragmentation) to enable endangered species to travel, meet, and breed with others of their kind. Scientific conservation and modern wildlife management techniques, with the expertise of scientifically trained staff, help manage these protected ecosystems and the wildlife found in them. Wild animals are also translocated and reintroduced to other locations physically when fragmented wildlife habitats are too far and isolated to be able to link together via a wildlife corridor, or when local extinctions have already occurred.\n\nModern policies of zoo associations and zoos around the world have begun putting dramatically increased emphasis on keeping and breeding wild-sourced species and subspecies of animals in their registered endangered species breeding programs. These specimens are intended to have a chance to be reintroduced and survive back in the wild. The main objectives of zoos today have changed, and greater resources are being invested in breeding species and subspecies for then ultimate purpose of assisting conservation efforts in the wild. Zoos do this by maintaining extremely detailed scientific breeding records (\"i.e.\" studbooks)) and by loaning their wild animals to other zoos around the country (and often globally) for breeding, to safeguard against inbreeding by attempting to maximize genetic diversity however possible.\n\nCostly (and sometimes controversial) ex-situ conservation techniques aim to increase the genetic biodiversity on our planet, as well as the diversity in local gene pools. by guarding against genetic erosion. Modern concepts like seedbanks, sperm banks, and tissue banks have become much more commonplace and valuable. Sperm, eggs, and embryos can now be frozen and kept in banks, which are sometimes called \"Modern Noah's Arks\" or \"Frozen Zoos\". Cryopreservation techniques are used to freeze these living materials and keep them alive in perpetuity by storing them submerged in liquid nitrogen tanks at very low temperatures. Thus, preserved materials can then be used for artificial insemination, \"in vitro\" fertilization, embryo transfer, and cloning methodologies to protect diversity in the gene pool of critically endangered species.\n\nIt can be possible to save an endangered species from extinction by preserving only \"parts\" of specimens, such as tissues, sperm, eggs, etc. – even after the death of a critically endangered animal, or collected from one found freshly dead, in captivity or from the wild. A new specimen can then be \"resurrected\" with the help of cloning, so as to give it another chance to breed its genes into the living population of the respective threatened species. Resurrection of dead critically endangered wildlife specimens with the help of cloning is still being perfected, and is still too expensive to be practical, but with time and further advancements in science and methodology it may well become a routine procedure not to far into the future.\n\nRecently, strategies for finding an integrated approach to \"in situ\" and \"ex situ\" conservation techniques have been given considerable attention, and progress is being made.\n\n", "id": "12845111", "title": "Genetic erosion"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=416954", "text": "Viral evolution\n\nViral evolution is a subfield of evolutionary biology and virology that is specifically concerned with the evolution of viruses. Viruses have short generation times and many, in particular RNA viruses, have relatively high mutation rates (on the order of one point mutation or more per genome per round of replication). This elevated mutation rate, when combined with natural selection, allows viruses to quickly adapt to changes in their host environment. In addition, most viruses provide many offspring, so any mutated genes can be passed on to a large number of offspring in a short time. Although the chance of mutations and evolution can change depending on the type of virus(double stranded DNA, double stranded RNA, single strand DNA, etc.), viruses overall have high chances for mutations. \n\nViral evolution is an important aspect of the epidemiology of viral diseases such as influenza (influenza virus), AIDS (HIV), and hepatitis (e.g. HCV). The rapidity of viral mutation also causes problems in the development of successful vaccines and antiviral drugs, as resistant mutations often appear within weeks or months after the beginning of a treatment. One of the main theoretical models applied to viral evolution is the quasispecies model, which defines a viral quasispecies as a group of closely related viral strains competing within an environment.\n\nViruses are ancient. Studies at the molecular level have revealed relationships between viruses infecting organisms from each of the three domains of life and viral proteins that pre-date the divergence of life and thus the last universal common ancestor. This indicates that some viruses emerged early in the evolution of life, and that viruses have probably arisen multiple times.\nThere are three classical hypotheses on the origins of viruses and how they evolved: \n\nVirologists are, however, beginning to reconsider and re-evaluate all three hypotheses.\n\nOne of the problems for those studying viral origins and evolution is their high rate of mutation, particularly the case in RNA retroviruses like HIV/AIDS. A recent study based on comparisons of viral protein folding structures, however, is offering some new evidence. Fold Super Families (FSF's) are proteins that show similar folding structures independent of the actual sequence of amino acids, and have been found to show evidence of viral phylogeny. Thus viruses have been found to be capable of being divided into 4 FSFs; based upon the three realms of bacterioviruses, archaeoviruses, and eukaryoviruses, together with a fourth FSF that seems to indicate that it pre-dated the separation of the three realms. Thus viral proteomes still contain traces of ancient evolutionary history that can be studied today. The study of protein FSFs suggests the existence of ancient cellular lineages common to both cells and viruses before the appearance of the 'last universal cellular ancestor' that gave rise to modern cells. Evolutionary pressure to reduce genome and particle size may have eventually reduced viro-cells into modern viruses, whereas other coexisting cellular lineages eventually evolved into modern cells. Furthermore, the long genetic distance between RNA and DNA FSF's suggests that the RNA world hypothesis may have new experimental evidence, with a long intermediary period in the evolution of cellular life.\n\nViruses do not form fossils in the traditional sense, because they are much smaller than the finest colloidal fragments forming sedimentary rocks that fossilize plants and animals. However, the genomes of many organisms contain endogenous viral elements (EVEs). These DNA sequences are the remnants of ancient virus genes and genomes that ancestrally 'invaded' the host germline. For example, the genomes of most vertebrate species contain hundreds to thousands of sequences derived from ancient retroviruses. These sequences are a valuable source of retrospective evidence about the evolutionary history of viruses, and have given birth to the science of paleovirology.\n\nThe evolutionary history of viruses can to some extent be inferred from analysis of contemporary viral genomes. The mutation rates for many viruses have been measured, and application of a molecular clock allows dates of divergence to be inferred.\n\nViruses evolve through changes or in their RNA (or DNA), some quite rapidly, and the best adapted mutants quickly outnumber their less fit counterparts. In this sense their evolution is Darwinian. The way viruses reproduce in their host cells makes them particularly susceptible to the genetic changes that help to drive their evolution. The RNA viruses are especially prone to mutations. In host cells there are mechanisms for correcting mistakes when DNA replicates and these kick in whenever cells divide. These important mechanisms prevent potentially lethal mutations from being passed on to offspring. But these mechanisms do not work for RNA and when an RNA virus replicates in its host cell, changes in their genes are occasionally introduced in error, some of which are lethal. One virus particle can produce millions of progeny viruses in just one cycle of replication, therefore the production of a few \"dud\" viruses is not a problem. Most mutations are \"silent\" and do not result in any obvious changes to the progeny viruses, but others confer advantages that increase the fitness of the viruses in the environment. These could be changes to the virus particles that disguise them so they are not identified by the cells of the immune system or changes that make antiviral drugs less effective. Both of these changes occur frequently with HIV.\n\nMany viruses (for example, influenza A virus) can \"shuffle\" their genes with other viruses when two similar strains infect the same cell. This phenomenon is called genetic shift, and is often the cause of new and more virulent strains appearing. Other viruses change more slowly as mutations in their genes gradually accumulate over time, a process known as genetic drift.\n\nThrough these mechanisms new viruses are constantly emerging and present a continuing challenge in attempts to control the diseases they cause. Most species of viruses are now known to have common ancestors, and although the \"virus first\" hypothesis has yet to gain full acceptance, there is little doubt that the thousands of species of modern viruses have evolved from less numerous ancient ones. The morbilliviruses, for example, are a group of closely related, but distinct viruses that infect a broad range of animals. The group includes measles virus, which infects humans and primates; canine distemper virus, which infects many animals including dogs, cats, bears, weasels and hyaenas; rinderpest, which infected cattle and buffalo; and other viruses of seals, porpoises and dolphins. Although it is not possible to prove which of these rapidly evolving viruses is the earliest, for such a closely related group of viruses to be found in such diverse hosts suggests the possibility that their common ancestor is ancient.\n\nViruses have been able to continue their infectious existence due to evolution. Their rapid mutation rates and natural selection has given viruses the advantage to continue to spread. One way that viruses have been able to spread is with the evolution of virus transmission. The virus can find a new host through:\n\n\nThere are also some ideas behind the idea that virulence, or the harm that the virus does on its host, depends on a few factors. These factors also have an effect on how the level of virulence will change over time. Viruses that transmit through vertical transmission (transmission to the offspring of the host) will evolve to have lower levels of virulence. Viruses that transmit through horizontal transmission (transmission between members of the same species that don't have a parent-child relationship) will usually evolve to have a higher virulence. \n\n", "id": "416954", "title": "Viral evolution"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22989201", "text": "Pan-genome\n\nIn molecular biology a pan-genome (or supra-genome) describes the full complement of genes in a clade (originally applied to species in bacteria and archaea, but also to plant species), which can have large variation in gene content among closely related strains or ecotypes. It is the union of the gene sets of all the strains of a clade (e.g. species). The significance of the pan-genome arises in an evolutionary context, especially with relevance to metagenomics, but is also used in a broader genomics context. Plant studies have shown that pan-genome dynamics is linked to transposable elements.\n\nThe pan-genome includes the \"core genome\" containing genes present in all individuals, an accessory or dispensable genome containing shell genes present in two or more strains, and finally unique cloud genes specific to single strains.\n\nSoft-core genes have also been found in most (95%) strains or ecotypes analyzed, leaving some room for assembly/annotation errors.\n\nThese distinctions are not completely objective, since they depend on which genomes are included in the analysis. Moreover, the term \"dispensable\" has been questioned.\n\nThere are two generalised types of pan-genomes, categorised by the number of new genes added to the pan-genome per sequenced genome. Species with a closed pan-genome would have very few genes added per sequenced genome after sequencing many strains, and the size of the full pan-genome could theoretically be predicted. Species with an open pan-genome have enough genes added per additional sequenced genome that predicting the size of the full pan-genome is not possible.\n\nThe original pan-genome concept was developed by Tettelin et al. when they sequenced six strains of \"Streptococcus agalactiae\" which could be described as a core genome shared by all isolates, accounting for approximately 80% of any single genome, plus a dispensable genome consisting of partially shared and strain-specific genes. Extrapolation suggested that the gene reservoir in the \"S. agalactiae\" pan-genome is vast and that new unique genes will continue to be identified even after sequencing hundreds of genomes.\n\nA similar pattern was found in \"Streptococcus pneumoniae\" when 44 strains were sequenced (see figure). With each new genome sequenced fewer new genes were discovered. In fact, the predicted number of new genes dropped to zero when the number of genomes exceeds 50 (note, however, that this is not a pattern found in all species). The main source of new genes in \"S. pneumoniae\" was \"Streptococcus mitis\" from which genes were transferred horizontally. The pan-genome size of \"S. pneumoniae\" increased logarithmically with the number of strains and linearly with the number of polymorphic sites of the sampled genomes, suggesting that acquired genes accumulate proportionately to the age of clones.\n\nAnother example for the latter can be seen in a comparison of the sizes of the core and the pan-genome of \"Prochlorococcus\". The core genome set is logically much smaller than the pan-genome, which is used by different ecotypes of \"Prochlorococcus\".\nA 2015 study on \"Prevotella\" bacteria isolated from humans, compared the gene repertoires of its species derived from different body sites of human. It also reported an open pan- genome showing vast diversity of gene pool.\n\nAs interest in pan-genomes increased, there have been a number of software tools developed to help analyze this kind of data. In 2015, a group reviewed the different kinds of analyses and tools a researcher may have available. There are seven kinds of analyses software developed to analyze pangenomes: cluster homologous genes; identify SNPs; plot pangenomic profiles; build phylogenetic relationships of orthologous genes/families of strains/isolates; function-based searching; annotation and/or curation; and visualizations.\n\nThe two most cited software tools at the end of 2014 were Panseq and the pan-genomes analysis pipeline (PGAP). Other options include BPGA - A Pan-Genome Analysis Pipeline for prokaryotic genomes., \nGET_HOMOLOGUES \n\nA similar review focused on plant pan-genomes was published also in 2015. The first software designed for plant pan-genomes is GET_HOMOLOGUES-EST.\n\n", "id": "22989201", "title": "Pan-genome"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44189", "text": "Reciprocal altruism\n\nIn evolutionary biology, reciprocal altruism is a behaviour whereby an organism acts in a manner that temporarily reduces its fitness while increasing another organism's fitness, with the expectation that the other organism will act in a similar manner at a later time. The concept was initially developed by Robert Trivers to explain the evolution of cooperation as instances of mutually altruistic acts. The concept is close to the strategy of \"tit for tat\" used in game theory.\n\nThe concept of \"reciprocal altruism\", as introduced by Trivers, suggests that altruism, defined as an act of helping another individual while incurring some cost for this act, could have evolved since it might be beneficial to incur this cost if there is a chance of being in a reverse situation where the individual who was helped before may perform an altruistic act towards the individual who helped them initially. This concept finds its roots in the work of W.D. Hamilton, who developed mathematical models for predicting the likelihood of an altruistic act to be performed on behalf of one's kin.\n\nPutting this into the form of a strategy in a repeated prisoner’s dilemma would mean to cooperate unconditionally in the first period and behave cooperatively (altruistically) as long as the other agent does as well. If chances of meeting another reciprocal altruist are high enough, or if the game is repeated for a long enough amount of time, this form of altruism can evolve within a population.\n\nThis is close to the notion of \"tit for tat\" introduced by Anatol Rapoport, although there still seems a slight distinction in that \"tit for tat\" cooperates in the first period and from thereon always replicates an opponent’s previous action, whereas “reciprocal altruists” stop cooperation in the first instance of non-cooperation by an opponent and stay non-cooperative from thereon. This distinction leads to the fact that in contrast to reciprocal altruism, tit for tat may be able to restore cooperation under certain conditions despite cooperation having broken down.\n\nChristopher Stephens shows a set of necessary and jointly sufficient conditions “… for an instance of reciprocal altruism:\n\n\nThere are two additional conditions necessary \"…for reciprocal altruism to evolve:\"\n\n\nThe first two conditions are necessary for altruism as such, while the third is distinguishing reciprocal altruism from simple mutualism and the fourth makes the interaction reciprocal.\nCondition number five is required as otherwise non-altruists may always exploit altruistic behaviour without any consequences and therefore evolution of reciprocal altruism would not be possible. However, it is pointed out that this “conditioning device” does not need to be conscious. Condition number six is required to avoid cooperation breakdown through backwards induction—a possibility suggested by game theoretical models.\n\nThe following examples could be understood as altruism. \nHowever, showing reciprocal altruism in an unambiguous way requires more evidence as will be shown later.\n\nAn example of reciprocal altruism is cleaning symbiosis, such as between cleaner fish and their hosts, though cleaners include shrimps and birds, and clients include fish, turtles, octopuses and mammals. Aside from the apparent symbiosis of the cleaner and the host during actual cleaning, which cannot be interpreted as altruism, the host displays additional behaviour that meets the criteria for altruism:\n\nThe host fish allows the cleaner fish free entrance and exit and does not eat the cleaner, even after the cleaning is done.\nThe host signals the cleaner it is about to depart the cleaner's locality, even when the cleaner is not in its body. The host sometimes chases off possible dangers to the cleaner.\n\nThe following evidence supports the hypothesis:\n\nThe cleaning by cleaners is essential for the host. In the absence of cleaners the hosts leave the locality or suffer from injuries inflicted by ecto-parasites. There is difficulty and danger in finding a cleaner. Hosts leave their element to get cleaned. Others wait no longer than 30 seconds before searching for cleaners elsewhere.\n\nA key requirement for the establishment of reciprocal altruism is that the same two individuals must interact repeatedly, as otherwise the best strategy for the host would be to eat the cleaner as soon as cleaning was complete. This constraint imposes both a spatial and a temporal condition on the cleaner and on its host. Both individuals must remain in the same physical location, and both must have a long enough lifespan, to enable multiple interactions. There is reliable evidence that individual cleaners and hosts do indeed interact repeatedly.\n\nThis example meets some, but not all, of the criteria described in Trivers’s model. In the cleaner-host system the benefit to the cleaner is always immediate. However, the evolution of reciprocal altruism is contingent on opportunities for future rewards through repeated interactions. In one study, nearby host fish observed \"cheater\" cleaners and subsequently avoided them. In these examples, true reciprocity is difficult to demonstrate since failure means the death of the cleaner. However, if Randall’s claim that hosts sometimes chase off possible dangers to the cleaner is correct, an experiment might be constructed in which reciprocity could be demonstrated.\n\nWarning calls, although exposing a bird and putting it in danger, are frequently given by birds. An explanation in terms of altruistic behaviors given by Trivers:\n\nIt has been shown that predators learn specific localities and specialize individually on prey types and hunting techniques.\nIt is therefore disadvantageous for a bird to have a predator eat a conspecific, because the experienced predator may then be more likely to eat him. Alarming another bird by giving a warning call tends to prevent predators from specializing on the caller’s species and locality. In this way, birds in areas in which warning calls are given will be at a selective advantage relative to birds in areas free from warning calls.\n\nNevertheless, this presentation lacks important elements of reciprocity. It is very hard to detect and ostracize cheaters. There is no evidence that a bird refrains from giving calls when another bird is not reciprocating, nor evidence that individuals interact repeatedly. Given the aforementioned characteristics of bird calling, a continuous bird emigration and immigration environment (true of many avian species) is most likely to be partial to cheaters, since selection against the selfish gene is unlikely.\n\nAnother explanation for warning calls is that these are not warning calls at all:\nA bird, once it has detected a bird of prey, calls to signal to the bird of prey that it was detected, and that there is no use trying to attack the calling bird. Two facts support this hypothesis:\n\n\nRed-winged blackbird males help defend neighbor's nests. There are many theories as to why males behave this way. One is that males only defend other nests which contain their extra-pair offspring. Extra-pair offspring is juveniles which may contain some of the male bird's DNA. Another is the tit-for-tat strategy of reciprocal altruism. A third theory is, males help only other closely related males. A study done by The Department of Fisheries and Wildlife provided evidence that males used a tit-for-tat strategy. The Department of Fisheries and Wildlife tested many different nests by placing stuffed crows by nests, and then observing behavior of neighboring males. The behaviors they looked for included the number of calls, dives, and strikes. After analyzing the results, there was not significance evidence for kin selection; the presence of extra-pair offspring did not affect the probability of help in nest defense. However, males reduced the amount of defense given to neighbors when neighbor males reduced defense for their nests. This demonstrates a tit-for-tat strategy, where animals help those who previously helped them. This strategy is one type of reciprocal altruism.\n\nVampire bats also display reciprocal altruism, as described by Wilkinson.\nThe bats feed each other by regurgitating blood. Since bats only feed on blood and will die after just 70 hours of not eating, this food sharing is a great benefit to the receiver and a great cost to the giver.\nTo qualify for reciprocal altruism, the benefit to the receiver would have to be larger than the cost to the donor. This seems to hold as these bats usually die if they do not find a blood meal two nights in a row. Also, the requirement that individuals who have behaved altruistically in the past are helped by others in the future is confirmed by the data. However, the consistency of the reciprocal behaviour, namely that a previously non-altruistic bat is refused help when it requires it, has not been demonstrated. Therefore, the bats do not seem to qualify yet as an example for reciprocal altruism.\nHowever, a closer look at the data shows that – except for a single interaction – all instances of feeding happened between individuals of the same group, who are on average cousins. Thus, it seems much more probable that this example is a case of kin selection than reciprocal altruism.\n\nGrooming in primates meets the conditions for reciprocal altruism according to some studies. One of the studies in vervet monkeys shows that among unrelated individuals, grooming induce higher chance of attending to each other's calls for aid. However, vervet monkeys also display grooming behaviors within group members, displaying alliances. This would demonstrate vervet monkey's grooming behavior as a part of kin selection since the activity is done between siblings in this study. Moreover, following the criteria by Stephen, if the study is to be an example of reciprocal altruism, it must prove the mechanism for detecting cheaters.\n\nIn comparison to that of other animals, the human altruistic system is a sensitive and unstable one. Therefore, the tendency to give, to cheat, and the response to other’s acts of giving and cheating must be regulated by a complex psychology in each individual, social structures, and cultural traditions. Individuals differ in the degree of these tendencies and responses.\nAccording to Trivers, the following emotional dispositions and their evolution can be understood in terms of regulation of altruism.\n\n\nIt is not known how individuals pick partners as there has been little research on choice. Modeling indicates that altruism about partner choices is unlikely to evolve, as costs and benefits between multiple individuals are variable. Therefore, the time or frequency of reciprocal actions contributes more to an individual's choice of partner than the reciprocal act itself.\n\n", "id": "44189", "title": "Reciprocal altruism"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6504044", "text": "Sugar signal transduction\n\nSugar signal transduction is an evolutionarily conserved mechanism used by organisms to survive. Sugars have an overwhelming effect on gene expression. In yeast, glucose levels are managed by controlling the mRNA levels of hexose transporters, while in mammals, the response to glucose is more tightly controlled with glucose metabolism and is therefore much more complex. Several glucose-responsive DNA motifs and DNA binding protein complexes have been identified in liver and b-cells. Although not proven, glucose repression appears to be conserved in plants because in many cases, both sugar induction and sugar repression are initiated by turning off transcription factors.\n\n\n", "id": "6504044", "title": "Sugar signal transduction"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=172331", "text": "Gene pool\n\nThe gene pool is the set of all genes, or genetic information, in any population, usually of a particular species.\n\nA large gene pool indicates extensive genetic diversity, which is associated with robust populations that can survive bouts of intense selection. Meanwhile, low genetic diversity (see inbreeding and population bottlenecks) can cause reduced biological fitness and an increased chance of extinction, although as explained by genetic drift new genetic variants, that may cause an increase in the fitness of organisms, are more likely to fix in the population if it is rather small.\n\nWhen all individuals in a population are identical with regard to a particular phenotypic trait, the population is said to be 'monomorphic\". When the individuals show several variants of a particular trait they are said to be polymorphic.\n\nThe Russian geneticist Aleksandr Sergeevich Serebrovskii first formulated the concept in the 1920s as \"genofond\" (gene fund), a word that was imported to the United States from the Soviet Union by Theodosius Dobzhansky, who translated it into English as “gene pool.”\n\nHarlan and de Wet (1971) proposed classifying each crop and its related species by gene pools rather than by formal taxonomy.\n\nGene pool centres refers to areas on the earth where important crop plants and domestic animals originated. They have an extraordinary range of the wild counterparts of cultivated plant species and useful tropical plants.\nGene pool centres also contain different sub tropical and temperate region species.\n\n", "id": "172331", "title": "Gene pool"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3364638", "text": "Green-beard effect\n\nThe green-beard effect is a thought experiment used in evolutionary biology to explain selective altruism among individuals of a species. Altruistic behaviour is paradoxical when viewed in the light of old ideas of evolutionary theory that emphasised the role of competition. The evolution of altruism is better explained through the gene-centered view of evolution, which emphasizes an interpretation of natural selection from the point of view of the gene which acts as an agent that has the metaphorical \"selfish goal\" of maximizing its own propagation. A gene for (behavioral) selective altruism can be favored by (natural) selection if the altruism is primarily directed at other individuals who share the gene. Since genes are invisible, such an effect requires perceptible markers for altruistic behaviour to occur.\n\nA green-beard effect occurs when an allele, or a set of linked alleles, produce three expressed (or phenotypic) effects: \n\nThe carrier of the gene (or a specific allele) is essentially recognizing copies of the same gene (or a specific allele) in other individuals. Whereas kin selection involves altruism to related individuals who share genes in a non-specific way, green-beard alleles promote altruism toward individuals who share a gene that is expressed by a specific phenotypic trait. Some authors also note that the green-beard effects can include \"spite\" for individuals lacking the \"green-beard\" gene. This can have the effect of delineating a subset of organisms within a population that is characterized by members who show greater cooperation toward each other, this forming a \"clique\" that can be advantageous to its members who are not necessarily kin.\n\nGreen-beard effect could increase altruism on green-beard phenotypes and therefore its presence in a population even if genes assist in the increase of genes that are not exact copies; all that is required is that they express the three required characteristics. Green-beard alleles are vulnerable to mutations that produce the perceptible trait without the helping behaviour.\n\nThe idea of a green-beard allele was proposed by William D. Hamilton in his articles of 1964, and got the name from the example used by Richard Dawkins (\"\"I have a green beard and I will be altruistic to anyone else with green beard\"\") in \"The Selfish Gene\" (1976).\n\nEvolutionary biologists have debated the potential validity of green-beard genes, suggesting that it would be extraordinarily rare for a single or even a set of linked genes to produce three complex phenotypic effects. This criticism has led some to believe that they simply cannot exist or that they only can be present in less complex organisms, such as microorganisms. Several discoveries within the past ten years have illuminated the validity of this critique.\n\nThe concept remained a merely theoretical possibility under Dawkins' selfish gene model until 1998, when a green-beard allele was first found in nature, in the red imported fire ant (\"Solenopsis invicta\"). Polygyne colony queens are heterozygous (Bb) at the Gp-9 gene locus. Their worker offspring can have both heterozygous (Bb) and homozygous (BB) genotypes. The investigators discovered that homozygous dominant (BB) queens, which in the wild form produce monogyne rather than polygyne colonies, are specifically killed when introduced into polygyne colonies, most often by heterozygous (Bb) and not homozygous (BB) workers. They concluded that the allele Gp-9 is linked to a greenbeard allele which induces workers bearing this allele to kill all queens that do not have it. A final conclusion notes that the workers are able to distinguish BB queens from Bb queens based on an odor cue.\n\nThe gene csA in the slime mould \"Dictyostelium discoideum\", discovered in 2003, codes for a cell adhesion protein which binds to gp80 proteins on other cells, allowing multicellular fruiting body formation on soil. Mixtures of csA knockout cells with wild-type cells yield spores, \"born\" from the fruiting bodies, which are 82% wild-type (WT). This is because the wild-type cells are better at adhering and more effectively combine into aggregates; knockout (KO) cells are left behind. On more adhesive but less natural substances, KO cells can adhere; WT cells, still better at adhering, sort preferentially into the stalk.\n\nIn 2006, green beard-like recognition was seen in the cooperative behavior among color morphs in side-blotched lizards, although the traits appear to be encoded by multiple loci across the genome.\n\nA more recent example, found in 2008, is a gene that makes brewer's yeast clump together in response to a toxin such as alcohol. By investigating flocculation, a type of self-adherence generally present in asexual aggregations, Smukalla \"et al.\" showed that \"S. cerevisiae\" is a model for cooperative behavior evolution. When this yeast expresses FLO1 in the laboratory, flocculation is restored. Flocculation is apparently protective for the FLO1+ cells, which are shielded from certain stresses (ethanol, for example). In addition FLO1+ cells preferentially adhere to each other. The authors therefore conclude that flocculation is driven by this greenbeard allele.\n\nA mammalian example appears to be the reproductive strategy of the wood mouse, which shows cooperation among spermatozoa. Single sperms hook in each other to form sperm-trains, which are able to move faster together than single sperm would do.\n\nIt has been suggested that speciation could be possible through the manifestation of a green-beard effect.\n\n\n", "id": "3364638", "title": "Green-beard effect"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3223867", "text": "Toxicofera\n\nToxicofera (Greek for \"those who bear toxins\") is a proposed clade of scaled reptiles (squamates) that includes the Serpentes (snakes), Anguimorpha (monitor lizards, gila monster, and alligator lizards) and Iguania (iguanas, agamas, and chameleons). Toxicofera contains about 4600 species, (nearly 60%) of extant squamata. It encompasses all venomous reptile species, as well as numerous related non-venomous species. There is little morphological evidence to support this grouping, however it has been recovered by all recent molecular analyses.\n\nToxicofera combines the following groups from traditional classification:\n\n\nDetailed cladogram in Reeder et al., 2015; Fig. 1 \n\nVenom in squamates has historically been considered a rarity; while it has been known in Serpentes since ancient times, the actual percentage of snake species considered venomous was relatively small (around 25%). Of the approximately 2,650 species of advanced snakes (Caenophidia), only the front-fanged species (~650) were considered venomous by the anthropocentric definition.\nFollowing the classification of Helodermatidae in the 19th century, their venom was thought to have developed independently. In snakes, the venom gland is in the upper jaw, but in helodermatids, it is found in the lower jaw. The origin of venom in squamates was thus considered relatively recent in evolutionary terms and the result of convergent evolution among the seemingly-polyphyletic venomous snake families.\n\nIn 2003 a study was published that described venom in snake subfamilies previously thought to lack it. Further study claimed nearly all \"non-venomous\" snakes produce venom to a certain extent, suggesting a single, and thus far more ancient origin for venom in Serpentes than had been considered until then. As a practical matter, Fry cautioned:\n\"Some non-venomous snakes have been previously thought to have only mild 'toxic saliva'. But these results suggest that they actually possess true venoms. We even isolated from a rat snake\" [\"Coelognathus radiatus\" (formerly known as \"Elaphe radiata\")]\", a snake common in pet stores, a typical cobra-style neurotoxin, one that is as potent as comparative toxins found in close relatives of the cobra. These snakes typically have smaller quantities of venom and lack fangs, but they can still deliver their venom via their numerous sharp teeth. But not all of these snakes are dangerous. It does mean, however, that we need to re-evaluate the relative danger of non-venomous snakes.\"\nThis prompted further research, which led to the discovery of venom (and venom genes) in species from groups which were not previously known to produce it, e.g. in Iguania (specifically \"Pogona barbata\" from the family Agamidae) and Varanidae (from \"Varanus varius\"). It is thought that this was the result of descent from a common venom-producing squamate ancestor; the hypothesis was described simply as the \"venom clade\" when first proposed to the scientific community. The venom clade included Anguidae for phylogenetic reasons and adopted a previously suggested clade name: Toxicofera.\n\nIt was estimated that the common ancestral species that first developed venom in the venom clade lived on the order of 200 million years ago. The venoms are thought to have evolved after genes normally active in various parts of the body duplicated and the copies found new use in the salivary glands.\n\nAmong snake families traditionally classified as venomous, the capacity seems to have evolved to extremes more than once by parallel evolution; 'non-venomous' snake lineages have either lost the ability to produce venom (but may still have lingering venom pseudogenes) or actually do produce venom in small quantities (e.g. 'toxic saliva'), likely sufficient to assist in small prey capture, but not normally causing harm to humans if bitten.\n\nThe newly discovered diversity of squamate species producing venoms is a treasure trove for those seeking to develop new pharmaceutical drugs; many of these venoms lower blood pressure, for example. Previously known venomous squamates have already provided the basis for medications such as Ancrod, Captopril, Eptifibatide, Exenatide and Tirofiban.\n\nThe world's largest venomous lizard and the largest species of venomous land animal is the Komodo dragon.\n\nOther scientists such as Washington State University biologist Kenneth V. Kardong and toxicologists Scott A. Weinstein and Tamara L. Smith, have stated that the allegation of venom glands found in many of these animals \"has had the effect of underestimating the variety of complex roles played by oral secretions in the biology of reptiles, produced a very narrow view of oral secretions and resulted in misinterpretation of reptilian evolution\". According to these scientists \"reptilian oral secretions contribute to many biological roles other than to quickly dispatch prey\". These researchers concluded that, \"Calling all in this clade venomous implies an overall potential danger that does not exist, misleads in the assessment of medical risks, and confuses the biological assessment of squamate biochemical systems\". More recently, it has been suggested that many of the shared toxins that underlie the Toxicofera hypothesis are in fact not toxins at all.\n\n", "id": "3223867", "title": "Toxicofera"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1178265", "text": "Encephalization\n\nEncephalization is defined as the amount of brain mass related to an animal's total body mass. Quantifying an animal's encephalization has been argued to be directly proportional, although not equal, to that animal's level of intelligence. Aristotle wrote in 335 BCE: \"Of all the animals, man has the brain largest in proportion to his size.\" Also, in 1871, Charles Darwin wrote in his book \"The Descent of Man\": \"No one, I presume, doubts that the large proportion which the size of man's brain bears to his body, compared to the same proportion in the gorilla or orang, is closely connected with his mental powers.\"\n\nIn 2004, Dennis Bramble and Daniel Lieberman proposed that early \"Homo\" were scavengers who used stone tools to harvest meat off carcasses and to open bones. They proposed that humans specialized in long-distance running to compete with other scavengers in reaching carcasses. It has been suggested that such an adaptation ensured a food supply that made large brains possible.\nMore encephalized species tend to have longer spinal shock duration.\n\nEncephalization can also refer to the tendency for a species to evolve larger brains through time. Anthropological studies indicate that bipedalism preceded encephalization in the human evolutionary lineage after divergence from the chimpanzee lineage. Compared to the chimpanzee brain, the human brain is larger and certain brain regions have been particularly altered during human evolution. Most brain growth of chimpanzees happens before birth while most human brain growth happens after birth.\n\nSnell's equation of simple allometry is:\n\nHere \"E\" is the weight of the brain, \"C\" is the cephalization factor, \"S\" is body weight, and \"r\" is the exponential constant. The exponential constant for primates is 0.28 and either 0.56 or 0.66 for mammals in general.\n\nThe \"Encephalization Quotient\" (EQ) is the ratio of \"C\" over the expected value for \"C\" of an animal of given weight \"S\".\n\nThis measurement of approximate intelligence is more accurate for mammals than for other phyla of Animalia.\n\n\n\n", "id": "1178265", "title": "Encephalization"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8038191", "text": "Preservation breeding\n\nPreservation breeding is an attempt by many animal breeders to preserve bloodlines of animals, either of a rare breed, or of rare pedigrees within a breed. One purpose of preservation breeding is to protect genetic diversity within a species, another is to preserve valuable genetic traits that may not be popular or in fashion in the present, but may be of great value in the future. Preservation breeding can also mean the breeding of animals to populate or repopulate an area where a species previously existed. It can also mean the breeding of species that are healthy and releasing the healthy individuals into a population that is defective or infected for the purpose of strengthening the overall health of the population.\n\n", "id": "8038191", "title": "Preservation breeding"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24979563", "text": "Evolutionary baggage\n\nEvolutionary baggage is the part of the genome of a population that was advantageous in past individuals but is disadvantageous under the pressures exerted by natural selection today.\n\nGenes that may have been advantageous in the past may be critically unfit for individuals in today’s environment. Natural selection is not a perfect process; if an organism is “fit enough” to survive a particular environment and reproduce, its genes are passed on to the next generation. Some of these genes may increase an organism’s fitness while some may even be slightly disadvantageous. This seeming paradox is the origin of evolutionary baggage, which is the collectively inherited traits that evolved in a different environment from the present. In the case of humans, the result is a “Paleolithic” genome, which is not adapted to today’s environment and is contributing to “diseases of civilization,” including atherosclerosis and obesity. Other hypotheses link evolutionary baggage to genetic diseases. Since all organisms descended from a common ancestor, evolutionary baggage can be seen universally among organisms.\n\nIt has been hypothesized that genetically-linked type I diabetes was advantageous during the extreme cold temperatures of the Ice Age 14,000 years ago. Type I diabetes is deleterious now, but would have conferred an advantage for individuals to survive extremely cold temperatures; this condition prevents production of insulin, keeping blood sugar levels high in the blood, which lowered the freezing point of the blood and protected the individuals with the condition. The condition has been linked to variation in the HLA genes. Furthermore, there is genetic evidence of a high prevalence of the condition among Scandinavian individuals, who were the direct descendants of the Northern European populations that endured the most extreme conditions during the Ice Age. This genetic evidence suggests that type I diabetes was a favorable condition in the past, and can be considered evolutionary baggage in individuals today because it can cause severe health problems.\n\nIt is a fundamental biological concept that organisms are most fit if they eat the same diet which their evolution has adapted them to. Throughout history, humans adapted to a diet by living off the land. Today, humans maintain the same genes that have been evolved from our ancestors and adapted to the diet they consumed. This has created a mismatch between the modern diet and lifestyle (which has emerged in evolutionary terms very recently), and the diet and lifestyle to which the human body has slowly adapted to over thousands of years. This phenomenon can be considered evolutionary baggage because the deviation from the Paleolithic diet and lifestyle has led to “diseases of civilization” such as obesity, hypertension, and type II diabetes.\n\nThe human body adapted over time to crave calorie-dense foods and to store energy efficiently because our ancestors did not have abundant food; this is called the thrifty gene hypothesis. These adaptations are genetic baggage today, causing humans to store fat efficiently despite abundant food availability. This leads to obesity, which is an important risk factor for cardiovascular disease. However, studies have shown that consuming a Paleolithic-type diet rich in unprocessed foods and lean protein decreased blood pressure and cholesterol level while increasing glucose tolerance.\n\nAs a recessive gene, Sickle-cell disease is only present if homozygous, with no dominant gene to beat them out. Sickle-cell disease, originating in people living in tropical areas where malaria is prevalent, is a hereditary blood disorder characterized by rigid, sickle-shaped red blood cells.. The unusual shape and rigidity of these altered red blood cells reduces a cell’s ability to effectively travel with regular blood flow, occasionally blocking veins and preventing proper blood flow. Life expectancy is shortened for people with sickle-cell disease, though modern medicine has significantly lengthened the life expectancy of someone with this disease. As detrimental as the effects of sickle-cell disease seem, it also offers an unforeseen benefit; humans with the sickle-cell gene show less severe symptoms when infected with malaria, as the abnormal shape of blood cells caused by the disease hinder the malaria parasite’s ability to invade and replicate within these cells. It is possible to have the sickle-cell allele, but not have the disease, for example if heterozygous.\nMalaria, a mosquito-borne infectious disease of humans and other animals, is a potentially deadly disease that causes fever, fatigue, nausea, muscular pain, coughing, and, in extreme cases, coma and death. Malaria is caused by parasitic protozoans transferred through mosquito saliva into a person’s circulatory system, where they travel to the liver to mature. Though eliminated in the U.S., there were an estimated 219 million documented cases of malaria in 2010 according to the World Health Organization.\nThe correlation between sickle-cell disease and malaria is a double-edged sword. Having a sickle-cell allele does limit the life expectancy of a person, however, the presence of sickle-cell genes reduces the detrimental effects of malaria should it be contracted. Natural selection allowed for the spreading of the sickle-cell gene in areas of high numbers of mosquitoes carrying malaria; those that weren't as susceptible to malaria were much more likely to live than those that were. Because malaria is not as prevalent as it once was, the benefits of sickle-cell have since eroded, leaving behind the detrimental effects of the disease.\n\nEvolutionary baggage from our ancestors may be causing disease in individuals today. In our ancestors, these phenotypes conferred selective advantage against harsh climate, infectious disease and scarce food. However, since these conditions are less common in today’s world, individuals with these phenotypes are at a selective disadvantage. This disadvantage has major implications in the area of health care because some of the diseases caused by evolutionary baggage are major contributors to the rising cost of health care in developed countries.\n", "id": "24979563", "title": "Evolutionary baggage"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7228438", "text": "Darwinian literary studies\n\nDarwinian literary studies (also known as literary Darwinism) is a branch of literary criticism that studies literature in the context of evolution by means of natural selection, including gene-culture coevolution. It represents an emerging trend of neo-Darwinian thought in intellectual disciplines beyond those traditionally considered as evolutionary biology: evolutionary psychology, evolutionary anthropology, behavioral ecology, evolutionary developmental psychology, cognitive psychology, affective neuroscience, behavioural genetics, evolutionary epistemology, and other such disciplines.\n\nInterest in the relationship between Darwinism and the study of literature began in the nineteenth century, for example, among Italian literary critics. For example, Ugo Angelo Canello argued that literature was the history of the human psyche, and as such, played a part in the struggle for natural selection, while Francesco de Sanctis argued that Emile Zola \"brought the concepts of natural selection, struggle for existence, adaptation and environment to bear in his novels\".\n\nModern Darwinian literary studies arose in part as a result of its proponents' dissatisfaction with the poststructuralist and postmodernist philosophies that had come to dominate literary study during the 1970s and 1980s. In particular, the Darwinists took issue with the argument that discourse constructs reality. The Darwinists argue that biologically grounded dispositions constrain and inform discourse. This argument runs counter to what evolutionary psychologists assert is the central idea in the \"Standard Social Science Model\": that culture wholly constitutes human values and behaviors.\n\nLiterary Darwinists use concepts from evolutionary biology and the evolutionary human sciences to formulate principles of literary theory and interpret literary texts. They investigate interactions between human nature and the forms of cultural imagination, including literature and its oral antecedents. By \"human nature\", they mean a pan-human, genetically transmitted set of dispositions: motives, emotions, features of personality, and forms of cognition. Because the Darwinists concentrate on relations between genetically transmitted dispositions and specific cultural configurations, they often describe their work as \"biocultural critique\".\n\nMany literary Darwinists aim not just at creating another \"approach\" or \"movement\" in literary theory; they aim at fundamentally altering the paradigm within which literary study is now conducted. They want to establish a new alignment among the disciplines and ultimately to encompass all other possible approaches to literary study. They rally to Edward O. Wilson's cry for \"consilience\" among all the branches of learning. Like Wilson, they envision nature as an integrated set of elements and forces extending in an unbroken chain of material causation from the lowest level of subatomic particles to the highest levels of cultural imagination. And like Wilson, they regard evolutionary biology as the pivotal discipline uniting the hard sciences with the social sciences and the humanities. They believe that humans have evolved in an adaptive relation to their environment. They argue that for humans, as for all other species, evolution has shaped the anatomical, physiological, and neurological characteristics of the species, and they think that human behavior, feeling, and thought are fundamentally shaped by those characteristics. They make it their business to consult evolutionary biology and evolutionary social science in order to determine what those characteristics are, and they bring that information to bear on their understanding of the products of the human imagination.\n\nEvolutionary literary criticism of a minimalist kind consists in identifying basic, common human needs—survival, sex, and status, for instance—and using those categories to describe the behavior of characters depicted in literary texts. Others pose for themselves a form of criticism involving an overarching interpretive challenge: to construct continuous explanatory sequences linking the highest level of causal evolutionary explanation to the most particular effects in individual works of literature. Within evolutionary biology, the highest level of causal explanation involves adaptation by means of natural selection. Starting from the premise that the human mind has evolved in an adaptive relation to its environment, literary Darwinists undertake to characterize the phenomenal qualities of a literary work (tone, style, theme, and formal organization), locate the work in a cultural context, explain that cultural context as a particular organization of the elements of human nature within a specific set of environmental conditions (including cultural traditions), identify an implied author and an implied reader, examine the responses of actual readers (for instance, other literary critics), describe the socio-cultural, political, and psychological functions the work fulfills, locate those functions in relation to the evolved needs of human nature, and link the work comparatively with other artistic works, using a taxonomy of themes, formal elements, affective elements, and functions derived from a comprehensive model of human nature.\n\nContributors to evolutionary studies in literature have included humanists, biologists, and social scientists. Some of the biologists and social scientists have adopted primarily discursive methods for discussing literary subjects, and some of the humanists have adopted the empirical, quantitative methods typical of research in the sciences. Literary scholars and scientists have also collaborated in research that combines the methods typical of work in the humanities with methods typical of work in the sciences.\n\nThe most hotly debated issue in evolutionary literary study concerns the adaptive functions of literature and other arts—whether there are any adaptive functions, and if so, what they might be. Proposed functions include transmitting information, including about kin relations, and by providing the audience with a model and rehearsal for how to behave in similar situations that may arise in the future. Steven Pinker (\"How the Mind Works\", 1997) suggests that aesthetic responsiveness is merely a side effect of cognitive powers that evolved to fulfill more practical functions, but Pinker also suggests that narratives can provide information for adaptively relevant problems. Geoffrey Miller (\"The Mating Mind\", 2000) argues that artistic productions in the ancestral environment served as forms of sexual display in order to demonstrate fitness and attract mates, similarly to the function of the peacock's tail. Brian Boyd (\"On the Origin of Stories\", 2009) argues that the arts are forms of cognitive \"play\" that enhance pattern recognition. In company with Ellen Dissanayake (\"Art and Intimacy\", 2000), Boyd also argues that the arts provide means of creating shared social identity and help create and maintain human bonding. Dissanayake, Joseph Carroll (\"Literary Darwinism\" 2004), and Denis Dutton (\"The Art Instinct\", 2009) all argue that the arts help organize the human mind by giving emotionally and aesthetically modulated models of reality. By participating in the simulated life of other people one gains a greater understanding of the motivations of oneself and other people. The idea that the arts function as means of psychological organization subsumes the ideas that the arts provide adaptively relevant information, enable us to consider alternative behavioral scenarios, enhance pattern recognition, and serve as means for creating shared social identity. And of course, the arts can be used for sexual display. In that respect, the arts are like most other human products—clothing, jewelry, shelter, means of transportation, etc. The hypothesis that the arts help organize the mind is not incompatible with the hypothesis of sexual display, but it subordinates sexual display to a more primary adaptive function.\n\nSome Darwinists have proposed explanations for formal literary features, including genres. Poetic meter has been attributed to a biologically based three-second metric. Gender preferences for pornography and romance novels have been explained by sexual selection. Different genres have been conjectured to correspond to different basic emotions: tragedy corresponding to sadness, fear, and anger; comedy to joy and surprise; and satire to anger, disgust, and contempt. Tragedy has also been associated with status conflict and comedy with mate selection. The satiric dystopian novel has been explained by contrasting universal human needs and oppressive state organization.\n\nCosmic evolutionism and evolutionary analogism: Literary Theorists who would call themselves \"literary Darwinists\" or claim some close alignment with the literary Darwinists share one central idea: that the adapted mind produces literature and that literature reflects the structure and character of the adapted mind. There are at least two other ways of integrating evolution into literary theory: cosmic evolutionism and evolutionary analogism. Cosmic evolutionists identify some universal process of development or progress and identify literary structures as microcosmic versions of that process. Proponents of cosmic evolution include Frederick Turner, Alex Argyros, and Richard Cureton. Evolutionary analogists take the process of Darwinian evolution—blind variation and selective retention—as a widely applicable model for all development. The psychologist Donald Campbell advances the idea that all intellectual creativity can be conceived as a form of random variation and selective retention. Rabkin and Simon offer an instance in literary study. They argue that cultural creations \"evolve in the same way as do biological organisms, that is, as complex adaptive systems that succeed or fail according to their fitness to their environment.\" Other critics or theorists who have some affiliation with evolutionary biology but who would not identify themselves as literary Darwinists include William Benzon (\"Beethoven's Anvil\") and William Flesch (\"Comeuppance\").\n\nCognitive rhetoric: Practitioners of \"cognitive rhetoric\" or cognitive poetics affiliate themselves with certain language-centered areas of cognitive psychology. The chief theorists in this school argue that language is based in metaphors, and they claim that metaphors are themselves rooted in biology or the body, but they do not argue that human nature consists in a highly structured set of motivational and cognitive dispositions that have evolved through an adaptive process regulated by natural selection. Cognitive rhetoricians are generally more anxious than literary Darwinists to associate themselves with postmodern theories of \"discourse,\" but some cognitive rhetoricians make gestures toward evolutionary psychology, and some critics closely affiliated with evolutionary psychology have found common ground with the cognitive rhetoricians. The seminal authorities in cognitive rhetoric are the language philosophers Mark Johnson and George Lakoff. The most prominent literary theorist in the field is Mark Turner. Other literary scholars associated with cognitive rhetoric include Mary Thomas Crane, F. Elizabeth Hart, Tony Jackson, Alan Richardson, Ellen Spolsky, Francis Steen, and Lisa Zunshine.\n\nIn addition to books oriented specifically to literature, this list includes books on cinema and books by authors who propound theories like those of the literary Darwinists but discuss the arts in general.\n\n\nEdited Collections: The volume edited by Boyd, Carroll, and Gottschall (2010) is an anthology, that is, a selection of essays and book excerpts, most of which had been previously published. Collections of essays that had not, for the most part, been previously published include those edited by Cooke and Turner (1999); Gottschall and Wilson (2005); Headlam Wells and McFadden (2006); Martindale, Locher, and Petrov (2007); Gansel and Vanderbeke;and Hoeg and Larsen (2009).\n\nJournals: Much evolutionary literary criticism has been published in the journal Philosophy and Literature. The journal \"Style\" has also been an important venue for the Darwinists. Social science journals that have published research on the arts include \"Evolution and Human Behavior\", \"Evolutionary Psychology\", and \"Human Nature\". The first issue of an annual volume \"The Evolutionary Review: Art, Science, Culture\" appeared in 2010; the journal ceased publication in 2013. The first issue of a semi-annual journal \"Evolutionary Studies in Imaginative Culture\" is scheduled to appear in spring of 2017.\n\nSymposia: A special double-issue of the journal \"Style\" (vol. 42, numbers 2/3, summer/fall 2008) was devoted to evolutionary literary theory and criticism, with a target article by Joseph Carroll (\"An Evolutionary Paradigm for Literary Study\"), responses by 35 scholars and scientists, and a rejoinder by Carroll. Also, a special evolutionary issue of the journal \"Politics and Culture\" contains 32 essays, including contributions to a symposium on the question \"How is culture biological?\", which includes six primary essays along with responses and rejoinders.\n\nDiscussion Groups: Online forums for news and discussion include the Biopoetics listserv, the Facebook group for Evolutionary Narratology, and the Facebook homepage for \"The Evolutionary Review.\" Researchers with similar interests can also be located on Academia.edu by searching for people who have a research interest in \"Evolutionary Literary Criticism and Theory / Biopoetics\" or in Literary Darwinism or Evolutionary Literary Theory.\n\nSome of the commentaries included in the special double issue of \"Style\" are critical of literary Darwinism. Other critical commentaries include those of William Benzon, \"Signposts for a Naturalist Criticism,\" (\"Entelechy: Mind & Culture,\" Fall 2005/Winter 2006); William Deresiewicz, \"Adaptation: On Literary Darwinism,\" \"The Nation\" June 8, 2009: 26-31; William Flesch, \"Comeuppance: Costly Signaling, Altruistic Punishment, and Other Biological Components of Fiction\", (Cambridge: Harvard UP, 2008); Eugene Goodheart, \"Darwinian Misadventures in the Humanities\", (New Brunswick: NJ: Transaction, 2007); Jonathan Kramnick, \"Against Literary Darwinism,\" in \"Critical Inquiry\", Winter 2011; \"Debating Literary Darwinism,\" a set of responses to Jonathan Kramnick's essay, along with Kramnick's rejoinder, in \"Critical Inquiry\", Winter 2012; Alan Richardson, \"Studies in Literature and Cognition: A Field Map,\" in \"The Work of Fiction: Cognition, Culture, and Complexity\", ed. Alan Richardson and Ellen Spolsky (Burlington, VT: Ashgate, 2004 1-29); and Lisa Zunshine, \"What is Cognitive Cultural Studies?,\" in \"Introduction to Cognitive Cultural Studies\" (Johns Hopkins UP, 2010 1-33). Goodheart and Deresiewicz, adopting a traditional humanist perspective, reject efforts to ground literary study in biology. Richardson disavows the Darwinists' tendency to attack poststructuralism. Richardson and Benzon both align themselves with cognitive science and distinguish that alignment from an alignment with evolutionary psychology. Flesch makes use of evolutionary research on game theory, costly signaling, and altruistic punishment but, like Stephen Jay Gould, professes himself hostile to evolutionary psychology. For a commentary that is sympathetic to evolutionary psychology but skeptical about the possibilities of using it for literary study, see Steven Pinker, \"Toward a Consilient Study of Literature,\" a review of \"The Literary Animal\", \"Philosophy and Literature\" 31 (2007): 162-178.\n\n\n", "id": "7228438", "title": "Darwinian literary studies"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=921151", "text": "Safety in numbers\n\nSafety in numbers is the hypothesis that, by being part of a large physical group or mass, an individual is less likely to be the victim of a mishap, accident, attack, or other bad event. Some related theories also argue (and can show statistically) that mass behaviour (by becoming more predictable and \"known\" to other people) can reduce accident risks, such as in traffic safety – in this case, the safety effect creates an actual reduction of danger, rather than just a redistribution over a larger group.\n\nThe mathematical biologist W.D. Hamilton proposed his selfish herd theory in 1971 to explain why animals seek central positions in a group. Each individual can reduce its own domain of danger by situating itself with neighbours all around, so it moves towards the centre of the group. The effect was tested in brown fur seal predation by great white sharks. Using decoy seals, the distance between decoys was varied to produce different domains of danger. The seals with a greater domain of danger had as predicted an increased risk of shark attack. Antipredator adaptations such as the flocking of birds, herding of sheep, and schooling of fish. Similarly, Adelie penguins wait to jump into the water until a large enough group has assembled, reducing each individual's risk of seal predation.\n\nIn 1949 R. J. Smeed reported that per capita road fatality rates tended to be lower in countries with higher rates of motor vehicle ownership. This observation led to Smeed's Law.\n\nIn 2003 P. L. Jacobsen compared rates of walking and cycling, in a range of countries, with rates of collisions between motorists and cyclists or walkers. He found an inverse correlation. This inverse correlation can be explained by theories including (1) safer walking and cycling conditions cause more people to walk and cycle, (2) more people walking and cycling cause walking and cycling to be safer, and (3) external factors cause walking and cycling to increase while simultaneously causing walking and cycling to be safer. For further discussion, see for example Correlation does not imply causation.\n\nWithout considering hypotheses 1 or 3, Jacobsen concluded that \"A motorist is less likely to collide with a person walking and bicycling if more people walk or bicycle.\" He described this theory as \"safety in numbers.\"\n\nSafety in numbers is also used to describe the evidence that the number of pedestrians or cyclists correlates inversely with the risk of a motorist colliding with a pedestrian or cyclist. This non-linear relationship was first shown at intersections. It has been confirmed by ecologic data from cities in California and Denmark, and European countries, and time-series data for the United Kingdom and the Netherlands. The number of pedestrians or bicyclists injured increases at a slower rate than would be expected based on their numbers. That is, more people walk or cycle where the risk to the individual pedestrian or bicyclist is lower. A 2002 study into whether pedestrian risk decreased with pedestrian flow, using 1983-86 data from signalized intersections in a town in Canada, found that in some circumstances pedestrian flow increased where the risk per pedestrian decreased.\n\nAfter cycling was promoted in Finland, there was a 75% drop in cyclists deaths and the number of trips increased by 72%.\n\nIn England, between 2000 and 2008, serious bicycle injuries declined by 12%. Over the same period, the number of bicycle trips made in London doubled. Motor vehicle traffic decreased by 16%, bicycle use increased by 28% and cyclist injuries had decreased by 20% in the first year of operation of the London Congestion Charge.\nIn January 2008, the number of cyclists in London being treated in hospitals for serious injuries had increased by 100% in six years. Over the same time, they report, the number of cyclists had increased by 84%. In York, comparing the periods 1991-93 and 1996–98, the number of bicyclists killed and seriously injured fell by 59%. The share of trips made by bicycle rose from 15% to 18%.\n\nIn Germany, between 1975 and 2001, the total number of bicycle trips made in Berlin almost quadrupled. Between 1990 and 2007, the share of trips made by bicycle increased from 5% to 10%. Between 1992 and 2006, the number of serious bicycle injuries declined by 38%. In Germany as a whole, between 1975 and 1998, cyclist fatalities fell by 66% and the percent of trips made by bicycle rose from 8% to 12%.\n\nIn America, during the period 1999-2007, the absolute number of cyclists killed or seriously injured decreased by 29% and the amount of cycling in New York city increased by 98%.\nIn Portland, Oregon, between 1990 and 2000, the percentage of workers who commuted to work by bicycle rose from 1.1% to 1.8%. By 2008, the proportion has risen to 6.0%; while the number of workers increased by only 36% between 1990 and 2008, the number of workers commuting by bicycle increased 608%. Between 1992 and 2008, the number of bicyclists crossing four bridges into downtown was measured to have increased 369% between 1992 and 2008.During that same period, the number of reported crashes increased by only 14%.\n\nIn Copenhagen, Denmark, between 1995 and 2006, the number of cyclists killed or seriously injured fell by 60%. During the same period, cycling increased by 44% and the percent of people cycling to work increased from 31% to 36%.\n\nIn the Netherlands, between 1980 and 2005, and cyclist fatalities decreased by 58% and cycling increased by 45%.\n\nDuring 7 years of the 1980s, admissions to hospital of cyclists declined by 5% and cycling in Western Australia increased by 82%.\n", "id": "921151", "title": "Safety in numbers"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=647359", "text": "Peripatric speciation\n\nPeripatric speciation is a mode of speciation in which a new species is formed from an isolated peripheral population. Since peripatric speciation resembles allopatric speciation, in that populations are isolated and prevented from exchanging genes, it can often be difficult to distinguish between them. Nevertheless, the primary characteristic of peripatric speciation proposes that one of the populations is much smaller than the other.\n\nThe terms peripatric and peripatry are often used in biogeography, referring to organisms whose ranges are closely adjacent but do not overlap, being separated where these organisms do not occur—for example on an oceanic island compared to the mainland. Such organisms are usually closely related (\"e.g.\" sister species); their distribution being the result of peripatric speciation. An alternative model of peripatric speciation, centrifugal speciation, posits that a species' population experiences periods of geographic range expansion followed by shrinking periods, leaving behind small isolated populations on the periphery of the main population. Other models have involved the effects of sexual selection on limited population sizes.\n\nThe existence of peripatric speciation is supported by laboratory experiments and empirical evidence. Scientists observing the patterns of a species biogeographic distribution and its phylogenetic relationships are able to reconstruct the historical process by which they diverged. Further, oceanic islands are often the subject of peripatric speciation research due to their isolated habitats—with the Hawaiian Islands widely represented in much of the scientific literature.\n\nPeripatric speciation was first proposed by Ernst Mayr in 1954 and fully theoretically modeled in 1982. It is related to the founder effect, where small living populations may undergo selection bottlenecks. The founder effect is based on models that suggest peripatric speciation can occur by the interaction of selection and genetic drift, which may play a significant role. In 1976 and 1980, the Kaneshiro model of peripatric speciation was developed by Kenneth Y. Kaneshiro which focused on sexual selection as a driver for speciation during population bottlenecks.\n\nPeripatric speciation models are identical to models of vicariance (allopatric speciation). Requiring both geographic separation and time, speciation can result as a predictable byproduct. Peripatry can be distinguished from allopatric speciation by three key features:\n\nThe size of a population is important because individuals colonizing a new habitat likely contain only a small sample of the genetic variation of the original population. This promotes divergence due to strong selective pressures, leading to the rapid fixation of an allele within the descendant population. This gives rise to the potential for genetic incompatibilities to evolve. These incompatibilities cause reproductive isolation, giving rise to—sometimes rapid—speciation events. Furthermore, two important predictions are invoked, namely that geological or climactic changes cause populations to become locally fragmented (or regionally when considering allopatric speciation), and that an isolated population's reproductive traits evolve enough as to prevent interbreeding upon potential secondary contact.\n\nThe peripatric model results in, what have been called, progenitor-derivative species pairs, whereby the derivative species (the peripherally isolated population)—geographically and genetically isolated from the progenitor species—diverges. A specific phylogenetic signature results from this mode of speciation. That is, the central population remains pleisomorphic, while the peripheral isolates become apomorphic. One possible consequence of peripatric speciation is that a geographically widespread ancestral species becomes paraphyletic, thereby becoming a paraspecies. The concept of a paraspecies is therefore a logical consequence of the evolutionary species concept, by which one species gives rise to a daughter species.\n\nWilliam Louis Brown, Jr. proposed an alternative model of peripatric speciation in 1957 called centrifugal speciation. This model contrasts with peripatric speciation by virtue of the origin of the genetic novelty that leads to reproductive isolation. A population of a species experiences periods of geographic range expansion followed by periods of contraction. During the contraction phase, fragments of the population become isolated as small refugial populations on the periphery of the central population. Because of the large size and potentially greater genetic variation within the central population, mutations arise more readily. These mutations are left in the isolated peripheral populations, whereby, promoting reproductive isolation. Consequently, Brown suggested that during another expansion phase, the central population would overwhelm the peripheral populations, hindering speciation. However, if the species finds a specialized ecological niche, the two may coexist. The phylogenetic signature of this model is that the central population becomes derived, while the peripheral isolates stay pleisomorphic—the reverse of the general model. In contrast to centrifugal speciation, peripatric speciation has sometimes been referred to as centripetal speciation.\n\nCentrifugal speciation has been largely ignored in the scientific literature, often dominated by the traditional model of peripatric speciation. Despite this, Brown cited a wealth of evidence to support his model, of which has not yet been refuted.\n\n\"Peromyscus polionotus\" and \"P. melanotis\" (the peripherally isolated species from the central population of \"P. maniculatus\") arose via the centrifugal speciation model. Centrifugal speciation may have taken place in tree kangaroos, South American frogs (\"Ceratophrys\"), shrews (\"Crocidura\"), and primates (\"Presbytis melalophos\"). John C. Briggs associates centrifugal speciation with centers of origin, contending that the centrifugal model is better supported by the data, citing species patterns from the proposed 'center of origin' within the Indo-West Pacific\n\nWhen a sexual species experiences a population bottleneck—that is, when the genetic variation is reduced due to small population size—mating discrimination among females may be altered by the decrease in courtship behaviors of males. Sexual selection pressures may become weakened by this in an isolated peripheral population, and as a by-product of the altered mating recognition system, secondary sexual traits may appear. Eventually, a growth in population size paired with novel female mate preferences will give rise to reproductive isolation from the main population-thereby completing the peripatric speciation process.\n\nSupport for this model comes from experiments and observation of species that exhibit asymmetric mating patterns such as the Hawaiian \"Drosophila\" species or the Hawaiian cricket \"Laupala\". However, this model has not been entirely supported by experiments, and therefore, it may not represent a plausible process of peripatric speciation that takes place in nature.\n\nIsland species provide direct evidence of speciation occurring peripatrically in such that, \"the presence of endemic species on oceanic islands whose closest relatives inhabit a nearby continent\" must have originated by a colonization event. Comparative phylogeography of oceanic archipelagos shows consistent patterns of sequential colonization and speciation along island chains, most notably on the Azores islands, Canary Islands, Society Islands, Marquesas Islands, Galápagos Islands, Austral Islands, and the Hawaiian Islands—all of which express geological patterns of spatial isolation and, in some cases, linear arrangement.\n\n\"Drosophila\" species on the Hawaiian archipelago have helped researchers understand speciation processes in great detail. It is well established that \"Drosophila\" has undergone an adaptive radiation into hundreds of endemic species on the Hawaiian island chain; originating from a single common ancestor (supported from molecular analysis). Studies consistently find that colonization of each island occurred from older to younger islands, and in \"Drosophila\", speciating peripatrically at least fifty percent of the time. In conjunction with \"Drosophila\", Hawaiian lobeliads (\"Cyanea\") have also undergone an adaptive radiation, with upwards of twenty-seven percent of extant species arising after new island colonization—exemplifying peripatric speciation—once again, occurring in the old-to-young island direction.\n\nOther endemic species in Hawaii also provide evidence of peripatric speciation such as the endemic flightless crickets (\"Laupala\"). It has been estimated that, \"17 species out of 36 well-studied cases of [\"Laupala\"] speciation were peripatric\". Plant species in genera's such as \"Dubautia\", \"Wilkesia\", and \"Argyroxiphium\" have also radiated along the archipelago.\n\n\"Tetragnatha\" spiders have also speciated peripatrically on the Hawaiian islands, Numerous arthropods have been documented existing in patterns consistent with the geologic evolution of the island chain, in such that, phylogenetic reconstructions find younger species inhabiting the geologically younger islands and older species inhabiting the older islands (or in some cases, ancestors date back to when islands currently below sea level were exposed). Spiders such as those from the genus \"Orsonwelles\" exhibit patterns compatible with the old-to-young geology. Other endemic genera such as \"Argyrodes\" have been shown to have speciated along the island chain. \"Pagiopalus\", \"Pedinopistha\", and part of the Thomisidae family have adaptively radiated along the island chain, as well as the Lycosidae family of wolf spiders.\n\nA host of other Hawaiian endemic arthropod species and genera have had their speciation and phylogeographical patterns studied: the \"Drosophila grimshawi\" species complex, damselflies (\"Megalagrion xanthomelas\" and \"Megalagrion pacificum\"), \"Doryonychus raptor\", \"Littorophiloscia hawaiiensis\", \"Anax strenuus\", \"Nesogonia blackburni\", \"Theridion grallator\", \"Vanessa tameamea\", \"Hyalopeplus pellucidus\", \"Coleotichus blackburniae\", \"Labula\", \"Hawaiioscia\", \"Banza\" (in the Tettigoniidae family), \"Caconemobius\", \"Eupethicea\", \"Ptycta\", \"Megalagrion\", \"Prognathogryllus\", \"Nesosydne\", \"Cephalops\", \"Trupanea\", and the tribe Platynini—all suggesting repeated radiations among the islands.\n\nOther animals besides insects show this same pattern such as the Hawaiian amber snail (\"Succinea caduca\"), and ‘Elepaio flycatchers.\n\nPhylogenetic studies of a species of crab spider (\"Misumenops rapaensis\") in the genus Thomisidae located on the Austral Islands have established the, \"sequential colonization of [the] lineage down the Austral archipelago toward younger islands\". Interestingly, \"M. rapaensis\" has been traditionally thought of as a single species; whereas this particular study found distinct genetic differences corresponding to the sequential age of the islands.\n\nThe occurrence of peripatry on continents is more difficult to detect due to the possibility of vicariant explanations being equally likely. However, studies concerning the Californian plant species \"Clarkia biloba\" and \"C. biloba\" strongly suggest a peripatric origin. In addition, a great deal of research has been conducted on several species of land snails involving chirality that suggests peripatry (with some authors noting other possible interpretations).\nThe chestnut-tailed antbird is located within the Serrania de Huanchaca in Bolivia. Within this region exists a fringe patch of forest estimated to have been isolated for 1000–3000 years. The population of antbirds that reside in the isolated patch express significant song divergence; thought to be an \"early step\" in the process of peripatric speciation. Further, peripheral isolation \"may partly explain the dramatic diversification of suboscines in Amazonia\".\n\nA study by Lucinda P. Lawson et al. found evidence for the occurrence of peripatric speciation in the montane spiny throated reed frog species complex (genus: \"Hyperolius\"). Lawson maintains that the species' geographic ranges within the Eastern Afromontane Biodiversity Hotspot support a peripatric model that is driving speciation; suggesting that this mode of speciation may play a significant role in \"highly fragmented ecosystems\".\n\nIn a study of the phylogeny and biogeography of the land snail genus \"Monacha\", the species \"M. ciscaucasica\" is thought to have speciated peripatrically from a population of \"M. roseni\". In addition, \"M. claussi\" consists of a small population located on the peripheral of the much larger range of \"M. subcarthusiana\" suggesting that it also arose by peripatric speciation.\n\nRed spruce (\"Picea rubens\") has arisen from an isolated population of black spruce (\"Picea mariana\"). During the Pleistocene, a population of black spruce became geographically isolated, likely due to glaciation. The geographic range of the black spruce is much larger than the red spruce. The red spruce has significantly lower genetic diversity in both its DNA and its mitochondrial DNA than the black spruce. Furthermore, the genetic variation of the red spruce has no unique mitochondrial haplotypes, only subsets of those in the black spruce; suggesting that the red spruce speciated peripatrically from the black spruce population. It is thought that the entire \"Picea\" genus in North America has been diversified by the process of peripatric speciation, as numerous pairs of closely related species in the genus have smaller southern population ranges; and those with overlapping ranges often exhibit weak reproductive isolation.\n\nUsing a phylogeographic approach paired with ecological niche models (\"i.e.\" prediction and identification of expansion and contraction species ranges into suitable habitats based on current ecological niches, correlated with fossil and molecular data), researchers found that the prairie dog species \"Cynomys mexicanus\" speciated peripatrically from \"Cynomys ludovicianus\" approximately 230,000 years ago. North American glacial cycles promoted range expansion and contraction of the prairie dogs, leading to the isolation of a relic population in a refugium located in the present day Coahuila, Mexico. This distribution and paleobiogeographic pattern correlates with other species expressing similar biographic range patterns such as with the \"Sorex cinereus\" complex.\n\nPeripatric speciation has been researched in both laboratory studies and nature. Coyne and Orr in \"Speciation\" suggest that most laboratory studies of allopatric speciation are also examples of peripatric speciation due to their small population sizes and the inevitable divergent selection that they undergo.\n\nMuch of the laboratory research concerning peripatry is inextricably linked to founder effect research. Coyne and Orr conclude that selection's role in speciation is well established, whereas genetic drift's role is unsupported by experimental and field data—suggesting that founder-effect speciation does not occur. Nevertheless, a great deal of research has been conducted on the matter, and one study conducted involving bottleneck populations of \"Drosophila pseudoobscura\" found evidence of isolation after a single bottleneck.\n\nBelow is a non-exhaustive table of laboratory experiments focused explicitly on peripatric speciation. Most of the studies also conducted experiments on vicariant speciation as well. The \"replicates\" column signifies the number of lines used in the experiment—that is, how many independent populations were used (not the population size or the number of generations performed).\n", "id": "647359", "title": "Peripatric speciation"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1157333", "text": "Evolutionary medicine\n\nEvolutionary medicine or Darwinian medicine is the application of modern evolutionary theory to understanding health and disease. Modern medical research and practice have focused on the molecular and physiological mechanisms underlying health and disease, while evolutionary medicine focuses on the question of why evolution has shaped these mechanisms in ways that may leave us susceptible to disease. The evolutionary approach has driven important advances in our understanding of cancer, autoimmune disease, and anatomy. Medical schools have been slower to integrate evolutionary approaches because of limitations on what can be added to existing medical curricula.\n\nAdaptation works within constraints, makes compromises and trade-offs, and occurs in the context of different forms of competition.\n\nAdaptations can only occur if they are evolvable. Some adaptations which would prevent ill health are therefore not possible.\nOther constraints occur as the byproduct of adaptive innovations.\n\nOne constraint upon selection is that different adaptations can conflict, which requires a compromise between them to ensure an optimal cost-benefit tradeoff.\n\nDifferent forms of competition exist and these can shape the processes of genetic change.\n\nHumans evolved to live as simple hunter-gatherers in small tribal bands, a very different way of life and environment compared to that faced by contemporary humans. This change makes present humans vulnerable to a number of health problems, termed \"diseases of civilization\" and \"diseases of affluence\". Humans evolved to live off of the land, and take advantage of the resources that were readily available to them. They evolved for the stone-age, and the environments of today bring about many disease causing ailments, that may or may not be deadly. \"Modern environments may cause many diseases such as deficiency syndromes like scurvy and rickets\" (Williams, 1991)\n\nIn contrast to the diet of early hunter-gatherers, the modern Western diet often contains high quantities of fat, salt, and simple carbohydrates, which include refined sugars and flours. These create health problems.\n\nExamples of aging-associated diseases are atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease, cancer, arthritis, cataracts, osteoporosis, type 2 diabetes, hypertension and Alzheimer's disease. The incidence of all of these diseases increases rapidly with aging (increases exponentially with age, in the case of cancer). \nOf the roughly 150,000 people who die each day across the globe, about two thirds—100,000 per day—die of age-related causes.<ref name=\"doi10.2202/1941-6008.1011\"></ref> In industrialized nations, the proportion is much higher, reaching 90%.\n\nMany contemporary humans engage in little physical exercise compared to the physically active lifestyles ancestral hunter-gatherers. It has been proposed that since prolonged periods of inactivity would have only occurred in early humans following illness or injury that it provides a cue for the body to engage in life-preserving metabolic and stress related responses such as inflammation that are now the cause of many chronic diseases.\n\nContemporary humans - due to medical treatment, frequent washing of clothing and the body, and improved sanitation - are mostly free of parasites, particularly intestinal ones. This causes problems in the proper development of the immune system although hygiene can be very important when it comes to maintaining good health. The hygiene hypothesis says that many modern humans are not exposed to microorganisms that have evolved in establishing the immune system as they should be. \"Microorganisms and macroorganisms such as helminths from mud, animals, and feces play a critical role in driving immunoregulation\" (Rook, 2012). They play a crucial role in building and training immune functions to fight off and repel some diseases, and protect against excessive inflammation which has been implicated in several diseases (such as recent evidence for Alzheimer's Disease).\n\nThis is a partial list: all links here go to a section describing or debating its evolutionary origin.\n\nAs noted in the table below, adaptationist hypotheses regarding the etiology of psychological disorders are often based on analogies with evolutionary perspectives on medicine and physiological dysfunctions (see in particular, Randy Nesse and George C. Williams' book \"Why We Get Sick\").\nEvolutionary psychiatrists and psychologists suggest that some mental disorders likely have multiple causes.\n\nSee several topic areas, and the associated references, below.\n\nCharles Darwin did not discuss the implications of his work for medicine, though biologists quickly appreciated the germ theory of disease and its implications for understanding the evolution of pathogens, as well as an organism’s need to defend against them.\n\nMedicine, in turn, ignored evolution, and instead focused (as done in the hard sciences) upon proximate mechanical causes.\nmedicine has modelled itself after a mechanical physics, deriving from Galileo, Newton, and Descartes... As a result of assuming this model, medicine is mechanistic, materialistic, reductionistic, linear-causal, and deterministic (capable of precise predictions) in its concepts. It seeks explanations for diseases, or their symptoms, signs, and cause in single, materialistic— i.e., anatomical or structural (e.g., in genes and their products)— changes within the body, wrought directly (linearly), for example, by infectious, toxic, or traumatic agents. \nGeorge C. Williams was the first to apply evolutionary theory to health in the context of senescence. Also in the 1950s, John Bowlby approached the problem of disturbed child development from an evolutionary perspective upon attachment.\n\nAn important theoretical development was Nikolaas Tinbergen’s distinction made originally in ethology between evolutionary and proximate mechanisms.\n\nRandolph M. Nesse summarizes its relevance to medicine: all biological traits need two kinds of explanation, both proximate and evolutionary. The proximate explanation for a disease describes what is wrong in the bodily mechanism of individuals affected by it. An evolutionary explanation is completely different. Instead of explaining why people are different, it explains why we are all the same in ways that leave us vulnerable to disease. Why do we all have wisdom teeth, an appendix, and cells that can divide out of control?\n\nThe paper of Paul Ewald in 1980, “Evolutionary Biology and the Treatment of Signs and Symptoms of Infectious Disease”, and that of Williams and Nesse in 1991, “The Dawn of Darwinian Medicine” were key developments. The latter paper “draw a favorable reception”, and led to a book, \"Why We Get Sick\" (published as \"Evolution and healing\" in the UK). In 2008, an online journal started: Evolution and Medicine Review.\n\n\nBooks\n\nOnline articles\n\n", "id": "1157333", "title": "Evolutionary medicine"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25372452", "text": "Human mitochondrial molecular clock\n\nThe human mitochondrial molecular clock is the rate at which mutations have been accumulating in the mitochondrial genome of hominids during the course of human evolution. The archeological record of human activity from early periods in human prehistory is relatively limited and its interpretation has been controversial. Because of the uncertainties from the archeological record, scientists have turned to molecular dating techniques in order to refine the timeline of human evolution. A major goal of scientists in the field is to develop an accurate hominid mitochondrial molecular clock which could then be used to confidently date events that occurred during the course of human evolution.\n\nEstimates of the mutation rate of human mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) vary greatly depending on the available data and the method used for estimation. The two main methods of estimation, phylogeny based methods and pedigree based methods, have produced mutation rates that differ by almost an order of magnitude. Current research has been focused on resolving the high variability obtained from different rate estimates.\n\nA major assumption of the molecular clock theory is that mutations within a particular genetic system occur at a statistically uniform rate and this uniform rate can be used for dating genetic events. In practice the assumption of a single uniform rate is an oversimplification. Though a single mutation rate is often applied, it is often a composite or an average of several different mutation rates. Many factors influence observed mutation rates and these factors include the type of samples, the region of the genome studied and the time period covered.\n\nThe rate at which mutations occur during reproduction, the germline mutation rate, is thought to be higher than all observed mutation rates, because not all mutations are successfully passed down to subsequent generations. MtDNA is only passed down along the matrilineal line, and therefore mutations passed down to sons are lost. Random genetic drift may also cause the loss of mutations. For these reasons, the actual mutation rate will not be equivalent to the mutation rate observed from a population sample.\n\nPopulation dynamics are believed to influence observed mutation rates. When a population is expanding, more germline mutations are preserved in the population. As a result, observed mutation rates tend to increase in an expanding population. When populations contract, as in a population bottleneck, more germline mutations are lost. Population bottlenecks thus tend to slow down observed mutation rates. Since the emergence of the species homo sapiens about 200,000 years ago, human population have expanded from a few thousand individuals living in Africa to over 6.5 billion all over the world. However, the expansion has not been uniform, so the history of human populations may consist of both bottlenecks and expansions.\n\nThe mutation rate across the mitochondrial genome is not uniformly distributed. Certain regions of the genome are known to mutate more rapidly than others. The Hypervariable regions are known to be highly polymorphic relative to other parts of the genome.\n\nThe rate at which mutations accumulate in coding and non-coding regions of the genome also differs as mutations in the coding region are subject to purifying selection. For this reason, some studies avoid coding region or synonymous mutations when calibrating the molecular clock. only consider synonymous mutations, they have recalibrated the molecular clock of human mtDNA as 7990 years per synonymous mutation over\nthe mitochondrial genome.\n\nThe mutation rate has been observed to vary with time. Mutation rates within the human species are faster than those observed along the human-ape lineage. The mutation rate is also thought to be faster in recent times, since the beginning of the Holocene 11,000 years ago.\n\nParallel mutation (sometimes referred to as Homoplasy) or convergent evolution occurs when separate lineages have the same mutation independently occur at the same site in the genome. \nSaturation occurs when a single site experiences multiple mutations. Parallel mutations and saturation result in the underestimation of the mutation rate because they are likely to be overlooked.\n\nIndividuals affected by heteroplasmy have a mixture of mtDNA types, some with new mutations and some without. The new mutations may or may not be passed down to subsequent generations. Thus the presence of heteroplasmic individuals in a sample may complicate the calculation of mutation rates.\n\nPedigree methods estimate the mutation rate by comparing the mtDNA sequences of a sample of parent/offspring pairs or analyzing mtDNA sequences of individuals from a deep-rooted genealogy. The number of new mutations in the sample is counted and divided by the total number of parent-to-child DNA transmission events to arrive at a mutation rate.\n\nPhylogeny based methods are estimated by first reconstructing the haplotype of the most recent common ancestor (MRCA) of a sample of two or more genetic lineages. A requirement is that the time to the most recent common ancestor (TMRCA) of the sample of lineages must already be known from other independent sources, usually the archeological record. The average number of mutations that have accumulated since the MRCA is then computed and divided by the TMRCA to arrive at the mutation rate. The human mutation rate is usually estimated by comparing the sequences of modern humans and chimpanzees and then reconstructing the ancestral haplotype of the chimpanzee-human common ancestor. According to the paleontological record the last common ancestor of humans may have lived around 6 million years ago.\n\nRates obtained by pedigree methods are about 10 times faster than those obtained by phylogenetic methods. Several factors acting together may be responsible for this difference. As pedigree methods record mutations in living subjects, the mutation rates from pedigree studies are closer to the germline mutation rate. Pedigree studies use genealogies that are only a few generations deep whereas phylogeny based methods use timescales that are thousands or millions of years deep. According to Henn et al. 2009, phylogeny based methods take into account events that occur over long time scales and are thus less affected by stochastic fluctuations. Howell et al. 2003 suggests that selection, saturation, parallel mutations and genetic drift are responsible for the differences observed between pedigree based methods and phylogeny based methods.\n\nAnatomical modern humans (AMH) spread out of Africa and over a large area of Eurasia and left artifacts along the northern coast of the Southwest, South, Southeast and East Asia. did not rely on a predicted T to estimate single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rates. Instead, they used evidence of colonization in Southeast Asia and Oceania to estimate mutation rates. In addition they used RFLP technology (\"Restriction fragment length polymorphism\") to examine differences between DNA. Using these techniques this group came up with a T of 140,000 to 290,000 years. It should be noted however that Cann et al. (1987) estimated the TMRCA of humans to be approximately 210 ky and the most recent estimates Soares et al. 2009 (using 7 million year chimpanzee human mtDNA MRCA) differ by only 9%, which is relatively close considering the wide confidence range for both estimates and calls for more ancient T.\n\nBecause chimps and humans share a matrilineal ancestor, establishing the geological age of that last ancestor allows the estimation of the mutation rate. The chimp-human last common ancestor (CHLCA) is frequently applied as an anchor for mt-T studies with ranges between 4 and 13 million years cited in the literature. This is one source of variation in the time estimates. The other weakness is the non-clocklike accumulation of SNPs, would tend to make more recent branches look older than they actually are.\nThese two sources may balance each other or amplify each other depending on the direction of the T error. There are two major reasons why this method is widely employed. First the pedigree based rates are inappropriate for estimates for very long periods of time. Second, while the archaeology anchored rates represent the intermediate range, archaeological evidence for human colonization often occurs well after colonization. For example, colonization of Eurasia from west to east is believed to have occurred along the Indian Ocean. However, the oldest archaeological sites that also demonstrate anatomically modern humans (AMH) are in China and Australia, greater than 42,000 years in age. However the oldest Indian site with AMH remains is from 34,000 years, and another site with AMH compatible archaeology is in excess of 76,000 years in age. Therefore, application of the anchor is a subjective interpretation of when humans were first present.\n\nA simple measure the sequence divergence between humans and chimps can be bound by observing the SNPs. Given that the mitogenome is about 16553 base pairs in length (each base-pair which can be aligned with known references is called a site), the formula is:<br>\nThe '2' in the denominator is derived from the 2 lineages, human and chimpanzee, that split from the CHLCA. Ideally it represents the accumulation of mutations on both lineages but in different positions (SNPs). As long as the number of SNP observed approximates the number of mutations this formula works well. However, at rapidly evolving sites mutations are obscured by saturation affects. Sorting positions within the mitogenome by rate and compensating for saturation are alternative approaches.\n\nBecause the T is subject to change with more paleontological information, the equation described above allows the comparison of TMRCA from different studies.\n\nTo overcome the effects of saturation, HVR analysis relied on the transversional distance between humans and chimpanzees. A transition to transversion ratio was applied to this distance to estimate sequence divergence in the HVR between chimpanzees and humans, and divided by an assumed T of 4 to 6 million years. Based on 26.4 substitutions between chimpanzee and human and 15:1 ratio, the estimated 396 transitions over 610 base-pairs demonstrated sequence divergence of 69.2% (rate * T of 0.369), producing divergence rates of \"roughly 11.5% to 17.3% per million years\". \n\nPartial coding region sequence originally supplemented HVR studies because complete coding region sequence was uncommon. There were suspicions that the HVR studies had missed major branches based on some earlier RFLP and coding region studies. was the first study to compare genomic sequences for coalescence analysis. Coding region sequence discriminated M and N haplogroups and L0 and L1 macrohaplogroups. Because the genomic DNA sequencing resolved the two deepest branches it improved some aspects estimating TMRCA over HVR sequence alone. Excluding the D-loop and using a 5-million-year T, estimated the mutation rate \"to be 1.70 × 10 per site per year\" (rate * T = 0.085, 15,435 sites).\n\nHowever, coding region DNA has come under question because coding sequences are either under purifying selection to maintain structure and function, or under regional selection to evolve new capacities. The problem with mutations in the coding region has been described as such: mutations occurring in the coding region that are not lethal to the mitochondria can persist but are negatively selective to the host; over a few generations these will persist, but over thousands of generations these slowly are pruned from the population, leaving SNPs. However, over thousands of generations regionally selective mutations may not be discriminated from these transient coding region mutations. The problem with rare mutations in the human mitogenomes is significant enough to prompt a half-dozen recent studies on the matter.\n\nSince it has become possible to sequence large numbers of ancient mitogenomes, several studies have estimated the mitochondrial mutation rate by measuring how many more mutations on average have accumulated in modern (or later) genomes compared to ancient (or earlier) ones descending from the same phylogenetic node. These studies have obtained similar results: central estimates for the whole chromosome, in substitutions per site per year: 2.47 × 10; 2.14 × 10; 2.53 × 10; and 2.74 × 10.\n\nMolecular clocking of mitochondrial DNA has been criticized because of its inconsistent molecular clock. A retrospective analysis of any pioneering process will reveal inadequacies. With mitochondrial the inadequacies are the argument from ignorance of rate variation and overconfidence concerning the T of 5 Ma. Lack of historical perspective might explain the second issue, the problem of rate variation is something that could only be resolved by the massive study of mitochondria that followed. The number of HVR sequences that have accumulated from 1987 to 2000 increased by magnitudes. used 2196 mitogenomic sequences and uncovered 10,683 substitution events within these sequences. Eleven of 16560 sites in the mitogenome produced greater than 11% of all the substitutions with statistically significant rate variation within the 11 sites. They argue that there is a neutral-site mutation rate which is a magnitude slower than rate observed for the fastest site, CRS 16519. Consequently, purifying selection aside, the rate of mutation itself varies between sites, with a few sites much more likely to undergo new mutations relative to others. Soares et al. (2009) noted two spans of DNA, CRS 2651-2700 and 3028-3082, that had no SNPs within the 2196 mitogenomic sequences.\n\n", "id": "25372452", "title": "Human mitochondrial molecular clock"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=623379", "text": "Haldane's rule\n\nHaldane's rule is an observation about the early stage of speciation, formulated in 1922 by the British evolutionary biologist J.B.S. Haldane, that states that if in a species hybrid only one sex is inviable or sterile, that sex is more likely to be the heterogametic sex. The heterogametic sex is the one with two different sex chromosomes; in therian mammals, for example, this is the male.\n\nHaldane himself described the rule as:\nHaldane's rule applies to the vast majority of heterogametic organisms. This includes the case where two species make secondary contact in an area of sympatry and form hybrids after allopatric speciation has occurred.\n\nThe rule includes both male heterogametic (XY or XO-type sex determination, such as found in mammals and \"Drosophila\" fruit flies) and female heterogametic (ZW-type sex determination, as found in birds and butterflies), and some dioecious plants such as campions.\n\nHybrid dysfunction (sterility and inviability) is a major form of post-zygotic reproductive isolation, which occurs in early stages of speciation. Evolution can produce a similar pattern of isolation in a vast array of different organisms. However, the actual mechanisms leading to Haldane's rule in different taxa remain largely undefined.\n\nMany different hypotheses have been advanced to address the evolutionary mechanisms to produce Haldane's rule. Currently, the most popular explanation for Haldane's rule is the composite hypothesis, which divides Haldane's rule into multiple subdivisions, including sterility, inviability, male heterogamety, and female heterogamety. The composite hypothesis states that Haldane's rule in different subdivisions has different causes. Individual genetic mechanisms may not be mutually exclusive, and these mechanisms may act together to cause Haldane's rule in any given subdivision. In contrast to these views that emphasise genetic mechanisms, another view hypothesizes that population dynamics during population divergence may cause Haldane's rule.\n\nThe main genetic hypotheses are:\n\n\nData from multiple phylogenetic groups support a combination of dominance and faster X-chromosome theories. However, it has recently been argued that dominance theory can not explain Haldane's rule in marsupials since both sexes experience the same incompatibilities due to paternal X-inactivation in females.\n\nThe dominance hypothesis is the core of the composite theory, and X-linked recessive/dominance effects have been demonstrated in many cases to cause hybrid incompatibilities. There is also supporting evidence for the faster male and meiotic drive hypotheses. For example, a significant reduction of male-driven gene flow is observed in Asian elephants, suggesting faster evolution of male traits.\n\nAlthough the rule was initially stated in context of diploid organisms with chromosomal sex determination, it has recently been argued that it can be extended to certain species lacking chromosomal sex determination, such as haplodiploids and hermaphrodites.\n\nThere are notable exceptions to Haldane's rule, where the homogametic sex turns out to be inviable while the heterogametic sex is viable and fertile. This is seen in \"Drosophila\" fruit flies.\n\n", "id": "623379", "title": "Haldane's rule"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1809113", "text": "Comparative biology\n\nComparative biology uses natural variation and disparity to understand the patterns of life at all levels—from genes to communities—and the critical role of organisms in ecosystems. Comparative biology is a cross-lineage approach to understanding the phylogenetic history of individuals or higher taxa and the mechanisms and patterns that drives it. Comparative biology encompasses Evolutionary Biology, Systematics, Neontology, Paleontology, Ethology, Anthropology, and Biogeography as well as historical approaches to Developmental biology, Genomics, Physiology, Ecology and many other areas of the biological sciences.The comparative approach also has numerous applications in human health, genetics, biomedicine, and conservation biology. The biological relationships (phylogenies, pedigree) are important for comparative analyses and usually represented by a phylogenetic tree or cladogram to differentiate those features with single origins (Homology) from those with multiple origins (Homoplasy).\n\n", "id": "1809113", "title": "Comparative biology"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1652585", "text": "Genetic anthropomorphism\n\nIn evolutionary biology, genetic anthropomorphism refers to \"thinking like a gene\". The central question is \"if I were a gene, what would I do in order to reproduce myself\". The question is an obvious fallacy since genes are incapable of thought. However, natural selection does act in such a way that those that are most successful at reproducing themselves (by following the optimum strategy) prosper. Thinking like a gene enables the results to be visualised. This is related to a philosophical tool known as the intentional stance.\n\nThe most notable genetic anthropomorphist was the British biologist, W. D. Hamilton. Hamilton's friend, Richard Dawkins, popularised the idea.\n\nAnthropomorphism has been criticised on a number of grounds, including that it is reductionist.\n", "id": "1652585", "title": "Genetic anthropomorphism"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5542769", "text": "Neutral mutation\n\nNeutral mutations are changes in DNA sequence that are neither beneficial nor detrimental to the ability of an organism to survive and reproduce. In population genetics, mutations in which natural selection does not affect the spread of the mutation in a species are termed neutral mutations. Neutral mutations that are inheritable and not linked to any genes under selection will either be lost or will replace all other alleles of the gene. This loss or fixation of the gene proceeds based on random sampling known as genetic drift. A neutral mutation that is in linkage disequilibrium with other alleles that are under selection may proceed to loss or fixation via genetic hitchhiking and/or background selection.\n\nWhile many mutations in a genome may decrease an organism’s ability to survive and reproduce, also known as fitness, these mutations are selected against and not passed on to future generations. The most commonly observed mutations detectable as variation in the genetic makeup of organisms and populations appear to have no visible effect on the fitness of individuals and are therefore neutral. The identification and study of neutral mutations has led to the development of the neutral theory of molecular evolution. The neutral theory of molecular evolution is an important and often controversial theory proposing that most molecular variation within and among species is essentially neutral and not acted on by selection. Neutral mutations are also the basis for using molecular clocks to identify such evolutionary events as speciation and adaptive or evolutionary radiations.\n\nCharles Darwin commented on the idea of neutral mutation in his work, hypothesizing that mutations that do not give an advantage or disadvantage may fluctuate or become fixed apart from natural selection. \"Variations neither useful nor injurious would not be affected by natural selection, and would be left either a fluctuating element, as perhaps we see in certain polymorphic species, or would ultimately become fixed, owing to the nature of the organism and the nature of the conditions.\" While Darwin is widely credited with introducing the idea of natural selection which was the focus of his studies, he also saw the possibility for changes that did not benefit or hurt an organism.\n\nDarwin's view of change being mostly driven by traits that provide advantage was widely accepted until the 1960s. While researching mutations that produce nucleotide substitutions in 1968, Motoo Kimura found that the rate of substitution was so high that if each mutation improved fitness, the gap between the most fit and typical genotype would be implausibly large. However, Kimura explained this rapid rate of mutation by suggesting that the majority of mutations were neutral, i.e. had little or no effect on the fitness of the organism. Kimura developed mathematical models of the behavior of neutral mutations subject to random genetic drift in biological populations. This theory has become known as the neutral theory of molecular evolution.\n\nAs technology has allowed for better analysis of genomic data, research has continued in this area. While natural selection may encourage adaptation to a changing environment, neutral mutation may push divergence of species due to nearly random genetic drift.\n\nNeutral mutation has become a part of the neutral theory of molecular evolution, proposed in the 1960s. This theory suggests that neutral mutations are responsible for a large portion of DNA sequence changes in a species. For example, bovine and human insulin, while differing in amino acid sequence are still able to perform the same function. The amino acid substitutions between species were seen therefore to be neutral or not impactful to the function of the protein. Neutral mutation and the neutral theory of molecular evolution are not separate from natural selection but add to Darwin's original thoughts. Mutations can give an advantage, create a disadvantage, or make no measurable difference to an organism's survival.\n\nA number of observations associated with neutral mutation were predicted in neutral theory including: amino acids with similar biochemical properties should be substituted more often than biochemically different amino acids; synonymous base substitutions should be observed more often than nonsynonymous substitutions; introns should evolve at the same rate as synonymous mutations in coding exons; and pseudogenes should also evolve at a similar rate. These predictions have been confirmed with the introduction of additional genetic data since the theory’s introduction.\n\nWhen an incorrect nucleotide is inserted during replication or transcription of a coding region, it can affect the eventual translation of the sequence into amino acids. Since multiple codons are used for the same amino acids, a change in a single base may still lead to translation of the same amino acid. This phenomenon is referred to as degeneracy and allows for a variety of codon combinations leading to the same amino acid being produced. For example, the codes TCT, TCC, TCA, TCG, AGT, and AGC all code for the amino acid serine. This can be explained by the wobble concept. Francis Crick proposed this theory to explain why specific tRNA molecules could recognize multiple codons. The area of the tRNA that recognizes the codon called the anticodon is able to bind multiple interchangeable bases at its 5' end due to its spatial freedom. A fifth base called inosine can also be substituted on a tRNA and is able to bind with A, U, or C. This flexibility allows for changes in bases in codons leading to translation of the same amino acid. The changing of a base in a codon without the changing of the translated amino acid is called a synonymous mutation. Since the amino acid translated remains the same a synonymous mutation has traditionally been considered a neutral mutation. Some research has suggested that there is bias in selection of base substitution in synonymous mutation. This could be due to selective pressure to improve translation efficiency associated with the most available tRNAs or simply mutational bias. If these mutations influence the rate of translation or an organism’s ability to manufacture protein they may actually influence the fitness of the affected organism.\n\nWhile substitution of a base in a noncoding area of a genome may make little difference and be considered neutral, base substitutions in or around genes may impact the organism. Some base substitutions lead to synonymous mutation and no difference in the amino acid translated as noted above. However, a base substitution can also change the genetic code so that a different amino acid is translated. This sort of substitution usually has a negative effect on the protein being formed and will be eliminated from the population through purifying selection. However, if the change has a positive influence, the mutation may become more and more common in a population until it becomes a fixed genetic piece of that population. Organisms changing via these two options comprise the classic view of natural selection. A third possibility is that the amino acid substitution makes little or no positive or negative difference to the affected protein. Proteins demonstrate some tolerance to changes in amino acid structure. This is somewhat dependent on where in the protein the substitution takes place. If it occurs in an important structural area or in the active site, one amino acid substitution may inactivate or substantially change the functionality of the protein. Substitutions in other areas may be nearly neutral and drift randomly over time.\n\nNeutral mutations are measured in population and evolutionary genetics often by looking at variation in populations. These have been measured historically by gel electrophoresis to determine allozyme frequencies. Statistical analyses of this data is used to compare variation to predicted values based on population size, mutation rates and effective population size. Early observations that indicated higher than expected heterozygosity and overall variation within the protein isoforms studied, drove arguments as to the role of selection in maintaining this variation versus the existence of variation through the effects of neutral mutations arising and their random distribution due to genetic drift. The accumulation of data based on observed polymorphism led to the formation of the neutral theory of evolution. According to the neutral theory of evolution, the rate of fixation in a population of a neutral mutation will be directly related to the rate of formation of the neutral allele.\n\nIn Kimura’s original calculations, mutations with |2 N\"s\"|<1 or |\"s\"|≤1/(2N) are defined as neutral. In this equation, N is the effective population size and is a quantitative measurement of the ideal population size that assumes such constants as equal sex ratios and no emigration, migration, mutation nor selection. Conservatively, it is often assumed that effective population size is approximately one fifth of the total population size. \"s\" is the selection coefficient and is a value between 0 and 1. It is a measurement of the contribution of a genotype to the next generation where a value of 1 would be completely selected against and make no contribution and 0 is not selected against at all. This definition of neutral mutation has been criticized due to the fact that very large effective population sizes can make mutations with small selection coefficients appear non neutral. Additionally, mutations with high selection coefficients can appear neutral in very small populations. The testable hypothesis of Kimura and others showed that polymorphism within species are approximately that which would be expected in a neutral evolutionary model.\n\nFor many molecular biology approaches, as opposed to mathematical genetics, neutral mutations are generally assumed to be those mutations which cause no appreciable effect on gene function. This simplification eliminates the effect of minor allelic differences in fitness and avoids problems when selection has only a minor effect.\n\nEarly convincing evidence of this definition of neutral mutation was shown through the lower mutational rates in functionally important parts of genes such as cytochrome c versus less important parts and the functionally interchangeable nature of mammalian cytochrome c in in vitro studies. Nonfunctional pseudogenes provide more evidence for the role of neutral mutations in evolution. The rates of mutation in mammalian globin pseudogenes has been shown to be much higher than rates in functional genes. According to neo-Darwinian evolution, such mutations should rarely exist as these sequences are functionless and positive selection would not be able to operate.\n\nThe McDonald-Kreitman test has been used to study selection over long periods of evolutionary time. This is a statistical test that compares polymorphism in neutral and functional sites and estimates what fraction of substitutions have been acted on by positive selection. The test often uses synonymous substitutions in protein coding genes as the neutral component; however, synonymous mutations have been shown to be under purifying selection in many instances.\n\nMolecular clocks can be used to estimate the amount of time since divergence of two species and for placing evolutionary events in time. Pauling and Zuckerkandl, proposed the idea of the molecular clock in 1962 based on the observation that the random mutation process occurs at an approximate constant rate. Individual proteins were shown to have linear rates of amino acid changes over evolutionary time. Despite controversy from some biologists arguing that morphological evolution would not proceed at a constant rate, many amino acid changes were shown to accumulate in a constant fashion. Kimura and Ohta explained these rates as part of the framework of the neutral theory. These mutations were reasoned to be neutral as positive selection should be rare and deleterious mutations should be eliminated quickly from a population. By this reasoning, the accumulation of these neutral mutations should only be influenced by the mutation rate. Therefore, the neutral mutation rate in individual organisms should match the molecular evolution rate in species over evolutionary time. The neutral mutation rate is affected by the amount of neutral sites in a protein or DNA sequence versus the amount of mutation in sites that are functionally constrained. By quantifying these neutral mutations in protein and/or DNA and comparing them between species or other groups of interest, rates of divergence can be determined.\n\nMolecular clocks have caused controversy due to the dates they derive for events such as explosive radiations seen after extinction events like the Cambrian explosion and the radiations of mammals and birds. Two-fold differences exist in dates derived from molecular clocks and the fossil record. While some paleontologists argue that molecular clocks are systemically inaccurate, others attribute the discrepancies to lack of robust fossil data and bias in sampling. While not without constancy and discrepancies with the fossil record, the data from molecular clocks have shown how evolution is dominated by the mechanisms of a neutral model and is less influenced by the action of natural selection.\n\n\n", "id": "5542769", "title": "Neutral mutation"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21599341", "text": "Medea hypothesis\n\nThe Medea hypothesis is a term coined by paleontologist Peter Ward for the anti-Gaian hypothesis that multicellular life, understood as a superorganism, is suicidal; in this view, microbial-triggered mass extinctions are attempts to return the Earth to the microbial-dominated state it has been for most of its history. It is named after the mythological Medea, who killed her own children. Medea represents the Earth, and her children are multicellular life.\n\nPast \"suicide attempts\" include:\n\nThe list does not include the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event, since this was, at least partially, externally induced by a meteor impact.\n\n\n", "id": "21599341", "title": "Medea hypothesis"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=635016", "text": "Index of evolutionary biology articles\n\nThis is a list of topics in evolutionary biology.\n\nabiogenesis – adaptation – adaptive mutation - adaptive radiation – allele – allele frequency – allopatric speciation – altruism – : anagenesis – anti-predator adaptation – Applications of evolution - aposematism – \"Archaeopteryx\" – aquatic adaptation – artificial selection – atavism\n\nHenry Walter Bates – biological organisation – \"Brassica oleracea\" – breed\n\nCambrian explosion – camouflage – Sean B. Carroll – catagenesis – gene-centered view of evolution – cephalization – Sergei Chetverikov – chronobiology – chronospecies – clade – cladistics – climatic adaptation – coalescent theory – co-evolution – co-operation – coefficient of relationship – common descent – convergent evolution – creation-evolution controversy – cultivar – conspecific song preference\n\nDarwin (unit) – Charles Darwin – Darwinism – Darwin's finches – Richard Dawkins – directed mutagenesis - Directed evolution - directional selection – Theodosius Dobzhansky – Dog breeding – Domestication – Domestication of the horse\n\n\"E. coli\" long-term evolution experiment - ecological genetics – ecological selection – \"Endless Forms Most Beautiful\" – endosymbiosis – error threshold (evolution) – evidence of common descent – evolution – evolutionary arms race – evolutionary capacitance \n\n\"Evolution:\" of ageing – of the brain – of cetaceans – of complexity – of dinosaurs – of the eye – of fish – of the horse – of insects – of human intelligence – of mammalian auditory ossicles – of mammals – of monogamy – of sex – of sirenians – of tetrapods – of the wolf \n\nevolutionary developmental biology – evolutionary dynamics – evolutionary game theory - evolutionary history of life – evolutionary history of plants – evolutionary medicine - evolutionary neuroscience – evolutionary psychology – evolutionary radiation – evolutionarily stable strategy – evolutionary taxonomy - evolutionary tree – evolvability – experimental evolution – exaptation – extinction\n\nJoe Felsenstein – R.A. Fisher – Fisher's reproductive value – fitness – fitness landscape – E.B. Ford – fossil\n\nGalápagos Islands – gene – gene-centric view of evolution – gene duplication – gene flow – gene pool – genetic drift – genetic hitchhiking – genetic recombination – genetic variation – genotype – genotype-environment correlation – genotype-environment interaction – genotype-phenotype distinction – Stephen Jay Gould – gradualism – Peter and Rosemary Grant – group selection\n\nJ. B. S. Haldane – W. D. Hamilton – Hardy-Weinberg principle – heredity – hierarchy of life – history of evolutionary thought – history of speciation – homologous chromosomes – homology (biology) – horizontal gene transfer – human evolution – human evolutionary genetics – human vestigiality – Julian Huxley – Thomas Henry Huxley\n\ninclusive fitness – insect evolution – Invertebrate paleontology (a.k.a. invertebrate paleobiology or paleozoology)\n\nkaryotype — kin selection – Motoo Kimura – koinophilia\n\nJean-Baptiste Lamarck – Lamarckism – landrace – Language – Last universal common ancestor – Level of support for evolution – Richard Lewontin – list of gene families – List of human evolution fossils – life-history theory – Wen-Hsiung Li – living fossils – Charles Lyell\n\nmacroevolution – macromutation – \"The Major Transitions in Evolution\" – maladaptation – \"The Malay Archipelago\" – mass extinctions – mating systems – John Maynard Smith – Ernst Mayr – Gregor Mendel – memetics – Mendelian inheritance – Mesozoic–Cenozoic radiation – microevolution – micropaleontology (a.k.a. micropaleobiology) – Miller–Urey experiment – mimicry – Mitochondrial Eve – modern evolutionary synthesis – molecular clock – molecular evolution – molecular phylogeny – molecular systematics – mosaic evolution – most recent common ancestor – Hermann Joseph Muller – Muller's ratchet – mutation – mutational meltdown\n\nnatural selection - natural genetic engineering – Nature versus nurture – Neo-Darwinism – neutral theory of molecular evolution – Baron Franz Nopcsa - Nothing in Biology Makes Sense Except in the Light of Evolution\n\nSusumu Ohno – Aleksandr Oparin – \"On The Origin of Species\" – Ordovician radiation – origin of birds – origin of language – orthologous genes\n\npaleoanthropology – paleobiology – paleobotany – paleontology – paleozoology (of vertebrates – of invertebrates) – parallel evolution – paraphyletic – particulate inheritance – peppered moth – peppered moth evolution – peripatric speciation – phenotype – phylogenetics – phylogeny – phylogenetic tree – \"Pikaia\" – Plant evolution – polymorphism (biology) – population – population bottleneck – population dynamics – population genetics – preadaptation – prehistoric archaeology – \"Principles of Geology\" – George R. Price – Price equation – punctuated equilibrium\n\nQuantum evolution – quasispecies model\n\nrace (biology) – Red Queen hypothesis – recapitulation theory – recent African origin of modern humans – recombination – Bernhard Rensch – reinforcement (speciation) – Reproductive coevolution in \"Ficus\" – \"r/K\" selection theory\n\nselection – selective breeding – selfish DNA – \"The Selfish Gene\" – sexual selection – signalling theory – sociobiology - Social effects of evolutionary theory – species – speciation – species flock – sperm competition – stabilizing selection – strain (biology) – subspecies – survival of the fittest – symbiogenesis – systematics – George Gaylord Simpson – G. Ledyard Stebbins\n\n\"Tiktaalik\" – timeline of evolution – Trait (biological) – transgressive phenotype – transitional fossil – transposon – tree of life – Triangle of U\n\nunit of selection\n\nvariety (botany) – Vertebrate paleontology (a.k.a. vertebrate paleobiology or paleozoology) – viral evolution – \"The Voyage of the Beagle\" – vestigiality\n\nAlfred Russel Wallace – Wallace effect – Wallace Line – Wallacea – George C. Williams (biologist) – Edward O. Wilson – Sewall Wright\n\nY-chromosomal Adam – Y-DNA haplogroups by ethnic groups\n\n", "id": "635016", "title": "Index of evolutionary biology articles"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=884589", "text": "Attachment theory\n\nAttachment theory is a psychological model that attempts to describe the dynamics of long-term and short-term interpersonal relationships between humans. However, \"attachment theory is not formulated as a general theory of relationships. It addresses only a specific facet\": how human beings respond within relationships when hurt, separated from loved ones, or perceiving a threat. Essentially all infants become attached if provided any caregiver, but there are individual differences in the quality of the relationships. In infants, attachment as a motivational and behavioral system directs the child to seek proximity with a familiar caregiver when they are alarmed, with the expectation that they will receive protection and emotional support. John Bowlby believed that the tendency for primate infants to develop attachments to familiar caregivers was the result of evolutionary pressures, since attachment behavior would facilitate the infant's survival in the face of dangers such as predation or exposure to the elements.\n\nThe most important tenet of attachment theory is that an infant needs to develop a relationship with at least one primary caregiver for the child's successful social and emotional development, and in particular for learning how to effectively regulate their feelings. Any caregiver is equally likely to become the principal attachment figure if they provide most of the child care and related social interaction. In the presence of a sensitive and responsive caregiver, the infant will use the caregiver as a \"safe base\" from which to explore. This relationship can be dyadic, as in the mother-child dyad frequently studied in Western culture, or it can involve a community of caregivers (siblings/extended family/teachers) as can be seen in areas of Africa and South America. It should be recognized that \"even sensitive caregivers get it right only about 50 percent of the time. Their communications are either out of synch, or mismatched. There are times when parents feel tired or distracted. The telephone rings or there is breakfast to prepare. In other words, attuned interactions rupture quite frequently. But the hallmark of a sensitive caregiver is that the ruptures are managed and repaired.\"\n\nAttachments between infants and caregivers form even if this caregiver is not sensitive and responsive in social interactions with them. This has important implications. Infants cannot exit unpredictable or insensitive caregiving relationships. Instead they must manage themselves as best they can within such relationships. Based on her established Strange Situation Protocol, research by developmental psychologist Mary Ainsworth in the 1960s and 1970s found that children will have different patterns of attachment depending primarily on how they experienced their early caregiving environment. Early patterns of attachment, in turn, shape — but do not determine — the individual's expectations in later relationships.<ref name=\"Bretherton/Mul\"></ref> Four different attachment classifications have been identified in children: secure attachment, anxious-ambivalent attachment, anxious-avoidant attachment, and disorganized attachment. Secure attachment is when children feel they can rely on their caregivers to attend to their needs of proximity, emotional support and protection. It is considered to be the best attachment style. Anxious-ambivalent attachment is when the infant feels separation anxiety when separated from the caregiver and does not feel reassured when the caregiver returns to the infant. Anxious-avoidant attachment is when the infant avoids their parents. Disorganized attachment is when there is a lack of attachment behavior.\n\nIn the 1980s, the theory was extended to attachment in adults. Attachment applies to adults when adults feel close attachment to their parents and their romantic partners.\n\nAttachment theory has become the dominant theory used today in the study of infant and toddler behavior and in the fields of infant mental health, treatment of children, and related fields.\n\nWithin attachment theory, \"attachment\" means \"a biological instinct in which proximity to an attachment figure is sought when the child senses or perceives threat or discomfort. Attachment behaviour anticipates a response by the attachment figure which will remove threat or discomfort\". Such bonds may be reciprocal between two adults, but between a child and a caregiver these bonds are based on the child's need for safety, security and protection, paramount in infancy and childhood. John Bowlby begins by noting that organisms at different levels of the phylogenetic scale regulate instinctive behavior in distinct ways, ranging from primitive reflex-like \"fixed action patterns\" to complex plan hierarchies with subgoals and strong learning components. In the most complex organisms, instinctive behaviors may be \"goal-corrected\" with continual on-course adjustments (such as a bird of prey adjusting its flight to the movements of the prey). The concept of cybernetically controlled behavioral systems organized as plan hierarchies (Miller, Galanter, and Pribram, 1960) thus came to replace Freud's concept of drive and instinct. Such systems regulate behaviors in ways that need not be rigidly innate, but—depending on the organism—can adapt in greater or lesser degrees to changes in environmental circumstances, provided that these do not deviate too much from the organism's environment of evolutionary adaptedness. Such flexible organisms pay a price, however, because adaptable behavioral systems can more easily be subverted from their optimal path of development. For humans, Bowlby speculates, the environment of evolutionary adaptedness probably resembles that of present-day hunter-gatherer societies for the purpose of survival, and, ultimately, genetic replication. Attachment theory is not an exhaustive description of human relationships, nor is it synonymous with love and affection, although these may indicate that bonds exist. Some infants direct attachment behaviour (proximity seeking) toward more than one attachment figure almost as soon as they start to show discrimination between caregivers; most come to do so during their second year. These figures are arranged hierarchically, with the principal attachment figure at the top. The set-goal of the attachment behavioural system is to maintain the accessibility and availability of the attachment figure. Many cultures use multiple forms of attachment including the dyadic model most prominent in Western cultures and allomothering. \"Alarm\" is the term used for activation of the attachment behavioural system caused by fear of danger. \"Anxiety\" is the anticipation or fear of being cut off from the attachment figure. If the figure is unavailable or unresponsive, separation distress occurs. In infants, physical separation can cause anxiety and anger, followed by sadness and despair. By age three or four, physical separation is no longer such a threat to the child's bond with the attachment figure. Threats to security in older children and adults arise from prolonged absence, breakdowns in communication, emotional unavailability, or signs of rejection or abandonment.\n\nThe attachment behavioural system serves to achieve or maintain proximity to the attachment figure. Pre-attachment behaviours occur in the first six months of life. During the first phase (the first eight weeks), infants smile, babble, and cry to attract the attention of potential caregivers. Although infants of this age learn to discriminate between caregivers, these behaviours are directed at anyone in the vicinity. During the second phase (two to six months), the infant increasingly discriminates between familiar and unfamiliar adults, becoming more responsive toward the caregiver; following and clinging are added to the range of behaviours. Clear-cut attachment develops in the third phase, between the ages of six months and two years. The infant's behaviour toward the caregiver becomes organized on a goal-directed basis to achieve the conditions that make it feel secure. By the end of the first year, the infant is able to display a range of attachment behaviours designed to maintain proximity. These manifest as protesting the caregiver's departure, greeting the caregiver's return, clinging when frightened, and following when able. With the development of locomotion, the infant begins to use the caregiver or caregivers as a \"safe base\" from which to explore. Infant exploration is greater when the caregiver is present because the infant's attachment system is relaxed and it is free to explore. If the caregiver is inaccessible or unresponsive, attachment behaviour is more strongly exhibited. Anxiety, fear, illness, and fatigue will cause a child to increase attachment behaviours.\n\nAfter the second year, as the child begins to see the caregiver as an independent person, a more complex and goal-corrected partnership is formed. Children begin to notice others' goals and feelings and plan their actions accordingly. For example, whereas babies cry because of pain, two-year-olds cry to summon their caregiver, and if that does not work, cry louder, shout, or follow.\n\nCommon attachment behaviours and emotions, displayed in most social primates including humans, are adaptive. The long-term evolution of these species has involved selection for social behaviors that make individual or group survival more likely. The commonly observed attachment behaviour of toddlers staying near familiar people would have had safety advantages in the environment of early adaptation, and has similar advantages today. Bowlby saw the environment of early adaptation as similar to current hunter-gatherer societies. There is a survival advantage in the capacity to sense possibly dangerous conditions such as unfamiliarity, being alone, or rapid approach. According to Bowlby, proximity-seeking to the attachment figure in the face of threat is the \"set-goal\" of the attachment behavioural system.\n\nBowlby's original account of a sensitivity period during which attachments can form of between six months and two to three years has been modified by later researchers. These researchers have shown that there is indeed a sensitive period during which attachments will form if possible, but the time frame is broader and the effect less fixed and irreversible than first proposed. With further research, authors discussing attachment theory have come to appreciate that social development is affected by later as well as earlier relationships. Early steps in attachment take place most easily if the infant has one caregiver, or the occasional care of a small number of other people. According to Bowlby, almost from the beginning, many children have more than one figure toward whom they direct attachment behaviour. These figures are not treated alike; there is a strong bias for a child to direct attachment behaviour mainly toward one particular person. Bowlby used the term \"monotropy\" to describe this bias. Researchers and theorists have abandoned this concept insofar as it may be taken to mean that the relationship with the special figure differs \"qualitatively\" from that of other figures. Rather, current thinking postulates definite hierarchies of relationships.\n\nEarly experiences with caregivers gradually give rise to a system of thoughts, memories, beliefs, expectations, emotions, and behaviours about the self and others. This system, called the \"internal working model of social relationships\", continues to develop with time and experience. Internal models regulate, interpret, and predict attachment-related behaviour in the self and the attachment figure. As they develop in line with environmental and developmental changes, they incorporate the capacity to reflect and communicate about past and future attachment relationships. They enable the child to handle new types of social interactions; knowing, for example, that an infant should be treated differently from an older child, or that interactions with teachers and parents share characteristics. This internal working model continues to develop through adulthood, helping cope with friendships, marriage, and parenthood, all of which involve different behaviours and feelings. The development of attachment is a transactional process. Specific attachment behaviours begin with predictable, apparently innate, behaviours in infancy. They change with age in ways that are determined partly by experiences and partly by situational factors. As attachment behaviours change with age, they do so in ways shaped by relationships. A child's behaviour when reunited with a caregiver is determined not only by how the caregiver has treated the child before, but on the history of effects the child has had on the caregiver.\n\nIn Western culture child-rearing, there is a focus on single attachment to primarily the mother. This dyadic model is not the only strategy of attachment that produces a secure and emotionally adept child. Having a single, dependably responsive and sensitive caregiver (namely the mother) does not necessarily guarantee the ultimate success of the child. Results from Israeli, Dutch and east African studies show that children with multiple caregivers grow up not only feeling secure, but developed \"more enhanced capacities to view the world from multiple perspectives.\" This evidence can be more readily found in hunter-gatherer communities rather than Western day-care contexts.\n\nIn hunter-gatherer communities, in the past and present, mothers are the primary caregivers but share the maternal responsibility of ensuring the child's survival with a variety of different allomothers. So while the mother is important, she is not the only opportunity for relational attachment that a child can make. Several group members (with or without blood relation) contribute to the task of bringing up a child, sharing the parenting role and therefore can be sources of multiple attachment. There is evidence of this communal parenting throughout history that \"would have significant implications for the evolution of multiple attachment.\"\n\nThe most common and empirically supported method for assessing attachment in infants (11 months–17 months) is the Strange Situation Protocol, developed by Mary Ainsworth as a result of her careful in-depth observations of infants with their mothers in Baltimore, USA (see below). The Strange Situation Protocol is a research tool that was not intended for diagnostic purposes. While the procedure may be used to supplement clinical impressions, the resulting classifications should not be confused with the psychiatric diagnosis 'Reactive Attachment Disorder (RAD)'. The clinical concept of RAD differs in a number of fundamental ways from the theory and research driven attachment classifications based on the Strange Situation Procedure. The idea that insecure attachments are synonymous with RAD is, in fact, not accurate and leads to ambiguity when formally discussing attachment theory as it has evolved in the research literature. This is not to suggest that the concept of RAD is without merit, but rather that the clinical and research conceptualizations of insecure attachment and attachment disorder are not synonymous.\n\nThe 'Strange Situation' is a laboratory procedure used to assess infants' pattern of attachment to their caregiver by introducing an unexpected threat, two brief separations from the mother followed by reunion. In the procedure, the mother and infant are placed in an unfamiliar playroom equipped with toys while a researcher films the procedure through a one-way mirror. The procedure consists of eight sequential episodes in which the infant experiences both separation from and reunion with the mother as well as the presence of an unfamiliar person (the Stranger). The protocol is conducted in the following format unless modifications are otherwise noted by a particular researcher:\n\n\nMainly on the basis of their reunion behaviour (although other behaviors are taken into account) in the Strange Situation Paradigm (Ainsworth et al., 1978; see below), infants can be categorized into three 'organized' attachment categories: Group B (later called 'secure'), Group A (later called 'anxious avoidant'), and Group C (later called 'anxious ambivalent'). There are subclassifications for each group (see below).\n\nBeginning in 1970, a series of expansions were added to Ainsworth's original patterns. They include the following: B4 (1970), A/C (1985) D/disorganized (1986), B5 (1988, 1992) A+, C+, & Depressed (1992, 2010). At later ages, additional categories have been described. Each of these patterns reflects a different kind of attachment relationship of the infant with the mother/caregiver. An infant may have a different pattern of attachment to each parent as well as to alternate caregivers. Pattern of attachment is thus not a part of the infant, but is characteristic of the protective and comforting quality of a specific relationship. These attachment patterns are associated with behavioral patterns and can help further predict a child's future personality.\n\n\"The strength of a child's attachment behaviour in a given circumstance does not indicate the 'strength' of the attachment bond. Some insecure children will routinely display very pronounced attachment behaviours, while many secure children find that there is no great need to engage in either intense or frequent shows of attachment behaviour.\"\n\nA toddler who is securely attached to his or her parent (or other familiar caregiver) will explore freely while the caregiver is present, typically engages with strangers, is often visibly upset when the caregiver departs, and is generally happy to see the caregiver return. The extent of exploration and of distress are affected, however, by the child's temperamental make-up and by situational factors as well as by attachment status. A child's attachment is largely influenced by their primary caregiver's sensitivity to their needs. Parents who consistently (or almost always) respond to their child's needs will create securely attached children. Such children are certain that their parents will be responsive to their needs and communications.\n\nIn the traditional Ainsworth et al. (1978) coding of the Strange Situation, secure infants are denoted as \"Group B\" infants and they are further subclassified as B1, B2, B3, and B4. Although these subgroupings refer to different stylistic responses to the comings and goings of the caregiver, they were not given specific labels by Ainsworth and colleagues, although their descriptive behaviors led others (including students of Ainsworth) to devise a relatively 'loose' terminology for these subgroups. B1's have been referred to as 'secure-reserved', B2's as 'secure-inhibited', B3's as 'secure-balanced', and B4's as 'secure-reactive'. In academic publications however, the classification of infants (if subgroups are denoted) is typically simply \"B1\" or \"B2\" although more theoretical and review-oriented papers surrounding attachment theory may use the above terminology.\n\nSecurely attached children are best able to explore when they have the knowledge of a secure base (their caregiver) to return to in times of need. When assistance is given, this bolsters the sense of security and also, assuming the parent's assistance is helpful, educates the child in how to cope with the same problem in the future. Therefore, secure attachment can be seen as the most adaptive attachment style. According to some psychological researchers, a child becomes securely attached when the parent is available and able to meet the needs of the child in a responsive and appropriate manner. At infancy and early childhood, if parents are caring and attentive towards their children, those children will be more prone to secure attachment.\n\nAnxious-ambivalent attachment is also misnamed as 'resistant attachment'. In general, a child with an anxious-ambivalent pattern of attachment will typically explore little (in the Strange Situation) and is often wary of strangers, even when the parent is present. When the mother departs, the child is often highly distressed. The child is generally ambivalent when she returns. The anxious-ambivalent strategy is a response to unpredictably responsive caregiving, and the displays of anger (ambivalent resistant) or helplessness (ambivalent passive) towards the caregiver on reunion can be regarded as a conditional strategy for maintaining the availability of the caregiver by preemptively taking control of the interaction.\n\nThe C1 (ambivalent resistant) subtype is coded when:\n\n\"\"... resistant behavior is particularly conspicuous. The mixture of seeking and yet resisting contact and interaction has an unmistakably angry quality and indeed an angry tone may characterize behavior in the preseparation episodes ...\"\"\n\nThe C2 (ambivalent passive) subtype is coded when:\n\n\"\"Perhaps the most conspicuous characteristic of C2 infants is their passivity. Their exploratory behavior is limited throughout the SS and their interactive behaviors are relatively lacking in active initiation. Nevertheless, in the reunion episodes they obviously want proximity to and contact with their mothers, even though they tend to use signalling rather than active approach, and protest against being put down rather than actively resisting release ... In general the C2 baby is not as conspicuously angry as the C1 baby.\"\"\n\nResearch done by McCarthy and Taylor (1999), found that children with abusive childhood experiences were more likely to develop ambivalent attachments. The study also found that children with ambivalent attachments were more likely to experience difficulties in maintaining intimate relationships as adults.\n\nAn infant with an anxious-avoidant pattern of attachment will avoid or ignore the caregiver—showing little emotion when the caregiver departs or returns. The infant will not explore very much regardless of who is there. Infants classified as anxious-avoidant (A) represented a puzzle in the early 1970s. They did not exhibit distress on separation, and either ignored the caregiver on their return (A1 subtype) or showed some tendency to approach together with some tendency to ignore or turn away from the caregiver (A2 subtype). Ainsworth and Bell theorized that the apparently unruffled behaviour of the avoidant infants was in fact a mask for distress, a hypothesis later evidenced through studies of the heart-rate of avoidant infants.\n\nInfants are depicted as anxious-avoidant when there is:\n\n\"\"... conspicuous avoidance of the mother in the reunion episodes which is likely to consist of ignoring her altogether, although there may be some pointed looking away, turning away, or moving away ... If there is a greeting when the mother enters, it tends to be a mere look or a smile ... Either the baby does not approach his mother upon reunion, or they approach in 'abortive' fashions with the baby going past the mother, or it tends to only occur after much coaxing ... If picked up, the baby shows little or no contact-maintaining behavior; he tends not to cuddle in; he looks away and he may squirm to get down.\"\"\n\nAinsworth's narrative records showed that infants avoided the caregiver in the stressful Strange Situation Procedure when they had a history of experiencing rebuff of attachment behaviour. The infant's needs were frequently not met and the infant had come to believe that communication of emotional needs had no influence on the caregiver. Ainsworth's student Mary Main theorized that avoidant behaviour in the Strange Situational Procedure should be regarded as \"a conditional strategy, which paradoxically permits whatever proximity is possible under conditions of maternal rejection\" by de-emphasising attachment needs. Main proposed that avoidance has two functions for an infant whose caregiver is consistently unresponsive to their needs. Firstly, avoidant behaviour allows the infant to maintain a conditional proximity with the caregiver: close enough to maintain protection, but distant enough to avoid rebuff. Secondly, the cognitive processes organising avoidant behaviour could help direct attention away from the unfulfilled desire for closeness with the caregiver—avoiding a situation in which the child is overwhelmed with emotion ('disorganized distress'), and therefore unable to maintain control of themselves and achieve even conditional proximity.\n\nAinsworth herself was the first to find difficulties in fitting all infant behaviour into the three classifications used in her Baltimore study. Ainsworth and colleagues sometimes observed \"tense movements such as hunching the shoulders, putting the hands behind the neck and tensely cocking the head, and so on. It was our clear impression that such tension movements signified stress, both because they tended to occur chiefly in the separation episodes and because they tended to be prodromal to crying. Indeed, our hypothesis is that they occur when a child is attempting to control crying, for they tend to vanish if and when crying breaks through.\" Such observations also appeared in the doctoral theses of Ainsworth's students. Crittenden, for example, noted that one abused infant in her doctoral sample was classed as secure (B) by her undergraduate coders because her strange situation behavior was \"without either avoidance or ambivalence, she did show stress-related stereotypic headcocking throughout the strange situation. This pervasive behavior, however, was the only clue to the extent of her stress\". Beginning in 1983, Crittenden offered A/C and other new organized classifications (see below). Drawing on records of behaviours discrepant with the A, B and C classifications, a fourth classification was added by Ainsworth's colleague Mary Main. In the Strange Situation, the attachment system is expected to be activated by the departure and return of the caregiver. If the behaviour of the infant does not appear to the observer to be coordinated in a smooth way across episodes to achieve either proximity or some relative proximity with the caregiver, then it is considered 'disorganized' as it indicates a disruption or flooding of the attachment system (e.g. by fear). Infant behaviours in the Strange Situation Protocol coded as disorganized/disoriented include overt displays of fear; contradictory behaviours or affects occurring simultaneously or sequentially; stereotypic, asymmetric, misdirected or jerky movements; or freezing and apparent dissociation. Lyons-Ruth has urged, however, that it should be more widely \"recognized that 52% of disorganized infants continue to approach the caregiver, seek comfort, and cease their distress without clear ambivalent or avoidant behavior\".\n\nThere is rapidly growing interest in disorganized attachment from clinicians and policy-makers as well as researchers. However, the disorganized/disoriented attachment (D) classification has been criticized by some for being too encompassing, including Ainsworth herself. In 1990, Ainsworth put in print her blessing for the new 'D' classification, though she urged that the addition be regarded as \"open-ended, in the sense that subcategories may be distinguished\", as she worried that too many different forms of behaviour might be treated as if they were the same thing. Indeed, the D classification puts together infants who use a somewhat disrupted secure (B) strategy with those who seem hopeless and show little attachment behaviour; it also puts together infants who run to hide when they see their caregiver in the same classification as those who show an avoidant (A) strategy on the first reunion and then an ambivalent-resistant (C) strategy on the second reunion. Perhaps responding to such concerns, George and Solomon have divided among indices of disorganized/disoriented attachment (D) in the Strange Situation, treating some of the behaviours as a 'strategy of desperation' and others as evidence that the attachment system has been flooded (e.g. by fear, or anger). Moreover, Crittenden argues that some behaviour classified as Disorganized/disoriented can be regarded as more 'emergency' versions of the avoidant and/or ambivalent/resistant strategies, and function to maintain the protective availability of the caregiver to some degree. Sroufe et al. have agreed that \"even disorganized attachment behaviour (simultaneous approach-avoidance; freezing, etc.) enables a degree of proximity in the face of a frightening or unfathomable parent\". However, \"the presumption that many indices of 'disorganization' are aspects of organized patterns does not preclude acceptance of the notion of disorganization, especially in cases where the complexity and dangerousness of the threat are beyond children's capacity for response.\" For example, \"Children placed in care, especially more than once, often have intrusions. In videos of the Strange Situation Procedure, they tend to occur when a rejected/neglected child approaches the stranger in an intrusion of desire for comfort, then loses muscular control and falls to the floor, overwhelmed by the intruding fear of the unknown, potentially dangerous, strange person.\"\n\nMain and Hesse found that most of the mothers of these children had suffered major losses or other trauma shortly before or after the birth of the infant and had reacted by becoming severely depressed. In fact, 56% of mothers who had lost a parent by death before they completed high school subsequently had children with disorganized attachments. Subsequent studies, whilst emphasising the potential importance of unresolved loss, have qualified these findings. For example, Solomon and George found that unresolved loss in the mother tended to be associated with disorganized attachment in their infant primarily when they had also experienced an unresolved trauma in their life prior to the loss.\n\nAcross different cultures deviations from the Strange Situation Protocol have been observed. A Japanese study in 1986 (Takahashi) studied 60 Japanese mother-infant pairs and compared them with Ainsworth’s distributional pattern. Although the ranges for securely attached and insecurely attached had no significant differences in proportions, the Japanese insecure group consisted of only resistant children with no children categorized as avoidant. This may be because the Japanese child rearing philosophy stressed close mother infant bonds than in Western cultures. In Northern Germany, Grossmann et al. (Grossmann, Huber, & Wartner, 1981; Grossmann, Spangler, Suess, & Unzner, 1985) replicated the Ainsworth Strange Situation with 46 mother infant pairs and found a different distributions of attachment classifications with a high number of avoidant infants: 52% avoidant, 34% secure, and 13% resistant (Grossmann et al., 1985). Another study in Israel found there was a high frequency of an ambivalent pattern which according to Grossman et al. (1985) could be attributed a greater parental push toward children’s independence.\n\nTechniques have been developed to allow verbal ascertainment of the child's state of mind with respect to attachment. An example is the \"stem story\", in which a child is given the beginning of a story that raises attachment issues and asked to complete it. For older children, adolescents and adults, semi-structured interviews are used in which the manner of relaying content may be as significant as the content itself. However, there are no substantially validated measures of attachment for middle childhood or early adolescence (approximately 7 to 13 years of age).\nSome studies of older children have identified further attachment classifications. Main and Cassidy observed that disorganized behavior in infancy can develop into a child using caregiving-controlling or punitive behaviour in order to manage a helpless or dangerously unpredictable caregiver. In these cases, the child's behaviour is organized, but the behaviour is treated by researchers as a form of 'disorganization' (D) since the hierarchy in the family is no longer organized according to parenting authority.\n\nPatricia McKinsey Crittenden has elaborated classifications of further forms of avoidant and ambivalent attachment behaviour. These include the caregiving and punitive behaviours also identified by Main and Cassidy (termed A3 and C3 respectively), but also other patterns such as compulsive compliance with the wishes of a threatening parent (A4).\n\nCrittenden's ideas developed from Bowlby's proposal that \"given certain adverse circumstances during childhood, the selective exclusion of information of certain sorts may be adaptive. Yet, when during adolescence and adulthood the situation changes, the persistent exclusion of the same forms of information may become maladaptive\".\n\nCrittenden proposed that the basic components of human experience of danger are two kinds of information:\n\n1. 'Affective information' – the emotions provoked by the potential for danger, such as anger or fear. Crittenden terms this \"affective information\". In childhood this information would include emotions provoked by the unexplained absence of an attachment figure. Where an infant is faced with insensitive or rejecting parenting, one strategy for maintaining the availability of their attachment figure is to try to exclude from consciousness or from expressed behaviour any emotional information that might result in rejection.\n\n2. Causal or other sequentially-ordered knowledge about the potential for safety or danger. In childhood this would include knowledge regarding the behaviours that indicate an attachment figure's availability as a secure haven. If knowledge regarding the behaviours that indicate an attachment figure's availability as a secure haven is subject to segregation, then the infant can try to keep the attention of their caregiver through clingy or aggressive behaviour, or alternating combinations of the two. Such behaviour may increase the availability of an attachment figure who otherwise displays inconsistent or misleading responses to the infant's attachment behaviours, suggesting the unreliability of protection and safety.\n\nCrittenden proposes that both kinds of information can be split off from consciousness or behavioural expression as a 'strategy' to maintain the availability of an attachment figure (See section above on Disorganized/disoriented attachment for distinction of \"Types\"): \"Type A strategies were hypothesized to be based on reducing perception of threat to reduce the disposition to respond. Type C was hypothesized to be based on heightening perception of threat to increase the disposition to respond.\" Type A strategies split off emotional information about feeling threatened and type C strategies split off temporally-sequenced knowledge about how and why the attachment figure is available. By contrast, type B strategies effectively utilise both kinds of information without much distortion. For example: a toddler may have come to depend upon a type C strategy of tantrums in working to maintain the availability of an attachment figure whose inconsistent availability has led the child to distrust or distort causal information about their apparent behaviour. This may lead their attachment figure to get a clearer grasp on their needs and the appropriate response to their attachment behaviours. Experiencing more reliable and predictable information about the availability of their attachment figure, the toddler then no longer needs to use coercive behaviours with the goal of maintaining their caregiver's availability and can develop a secure attachment to their caregiver since they trust that their needs and communications will be heeded.\n\nResearch based on data from longitudinal studies, such as the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development Study of Early Child Care and the Minnesota Study of Risk and Adaption from Birth to Adulthood, and from cross-sectional studies, consistently shows associations between early attachment classifications and peer relationships as to both quantity and quality. Lyons-Ruth, for example, found that \"for each additional withdrawing behavior displayed by mothers in relation to their infant's attachment cues in the Strange Situation Procedure, the likelihood of clinical referral by service providers was increased by 50%.\"\n\nThere is an extensive body of research demonstrating a significant association between attachment organizations and children's functioning across multiple domains. Early insecure attachment does not necessarily predict difficulties, but it is a liability for the child, particularly if similar parental behaviours continue throughout childhood. Compared to that of securely attached children, the adjustment of insecure children in many spheres of life is not as soundly based, putting their future relationships in jeopardy. Although the link is not fully established by research and there are other influences besides attachment, secure infants are more likely to become socially competent than their insecure peers. Relationships formed with peers influence the acquisition of social skills, intellectual development and the formation of social identity. Classification of children's peer status (popular, neglected or rejected) has been found to predict subsequent adjustment. Insecure children, particularly avoidant children, are especially vulnerable to family risk. Their social and behavioural problems increase or decline with deterioration or improvement in parenting. However, an early secure attachment appears to have a lasting protective function. As with attachment to parental figures, subsequent experiences may alter the course of development.\n\nStudies have suggested that infants with a high-risk for Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) may express attachment security differently from infants with a low-risk for ASD. Behavioral problems and social competence in insecure children increase or decline with deterioration or improvement in quality of parenting and the degree of risk in the family environment.\n\nSome authors have questioned the idea that a taxonomy of categories representing a qualitative difference in attachment relationships can be developed. Examination of data from 1,139 15-month-olds showed that variation in attachment patterns was continuous rather than grouped. This criticism introduces important questions for attachment typologies and the mechanisms behind apparent types. However, it has relatively little relevance for attachment theory itself, which \"neither requires nor predicts discrete patterns of attachment.\"\n\nThere is some evidence that gender differences in attachment patterns of adaptive significance begin to emerge in middle childhood. Insecure attachment and early psychosocial stress indicate the presence of environmental risk (for example poverty, mental illness, instability, minority status, violence). Environmental risk can cause insecure attachment, while also favouring the development of strategies for earlier reproduction. Different reproductive strategies have different adaptive values for males and females: Insecure males tend to adopt avoidant strategies, whereas insecure females tend to adopt anxious/ambivalent strategies, unless they are in a very high risk environment. Adrenarche is proposed as the endocrine mechanism underlying the reorganization of insecure attachment in middle childhood.\n\nChildhood and adolescence allows the development of an internal working model useful for forming attachments. This internal working model is related to the individual's state of mind which develops with respect to attachment generally and explores how attachment functions in relationship dynamics based on childhood and adolescent experience. The organization of an internal working model is generally seen as leading to more stable attachments in those who develop such a model, rather than those who rely more on the individual's state of mind alone in forming new attachments.\n\nAge, cognitive growth, and continued social experience advance the development and complexity of the internal working model. Attachment-related behaviours lose some characteristics typical of the infant-toddler period and take on age-related tendencies. The preschool period involves the use of negotiation and bargaining. For example, four-year-olds are not distressed by separation if they and their caregiver have already negotiated a shared plan for the separation and reunion.\n\nIdeally, these social skills become incorporated into the internal working model to be used with other children and later with adult peers. As children move into the school years at about six years old, most develop a goal-corrected partnership with parents, in which each partner is willing to compromise in order to maintain a gratifying relationship. By middle childhood, the goal of the attachment behavioural system has changed from proximity to the attachment figure to availability. Generally, a child is content with longer separations, provided contact—or the possibility of physically reuniting, if needed—is available. Attachment behaviours such as clinging and following decline and self-reliance increases. By middle childhood (ages 7–11), there may be a shift toward mutual coregulation of secure-base contact in which caregiver and child negotiate methods of maintaining communication and supervision as the child moves toward a greater degree of independence.\n\nAttachment theory was extended to adult romantic relationships in the late 1980s by Cindy Hazan and Phillip Shaver. Four styles of attachment have been identified in adults: secure, anxious-preoccupied, dismissive-avoidant and fearful-avoidant. These roughly correspond to infant classifications: secure, insecure-ambivalent, insecure-avoidant and disorganized/disoriented.\n\nSecurely attached adults tend to have positive views of themselves, their partners and their relationships. They feel comfortable with intimacy and independence, balancing the two. Anxious-preoccupied adults seek high levels of intimacy, approval and responsiveness from partners, becoming overly dependent. They tend to be less trusting, have less positive views about themselves and their partners, and may exhibit high levels of emotional expressiveness, worry and impulsiveness in their relationships. Dismissive-avoidant adults desire a high level of independence, often appearing to avoid attachment altogether. They view themselves as self-sufficient, invulnerable to attachment feelings and not needing close relationships. They tend to suppress their feelings, dealing with rejection by distancing themselves from partners of whom they often have a poor opinion. Fearful-avoidant adults have mixed feelings about close relationships, both desiring and feeling uncomfortable with emotional closeness. They tend to mistrust their partners and view themselves as unworthy. Like dismissive-avoidant adults, fearful-avoidant adults tend to seek less intimacy, suppressing their feelings.\n\nTwo main aspects of adult attachment have been studied. The organization and stability of the mental working models that underlie the attachment styles is explored by social psychologists interested in romantic attachment. Developmental psychologists interested in the individual's state of mind with respect to attachment generally explore how attachment functions in relationship dynamics and impacts relationship outcomes. The organization of mental working models is more stable while the individual's state of mind with respect to attachment fluctuates more. Some authors have suggested that adults do not hold a single set of working models. Instead, on one level they have a set of rules and assumptions about attachment relationships in general. On another level they hold information about specific relationships or relationship events. Information at different levels need not be consistent. Individuals can therefore hold different internal working models for different relationships.\n\nThere are a number of different measures of adult attachment, the most common being self-report questionnaires and coded interviews based on the Adult Attachment Interview. The various measures were developed primarily as research tools, for different purposes and addressing different domains, for example romantic relationships, parental relationships or peer relationships. Some classify an adult's state of mind with respect to attachment and attachment patterns by reference to childhood experiences, while others assess relationship behaviours and security regarding parents and peers.\n\nThe early thinking of the object relations school of psychoanalysis, particularly Melanie Klein, influenced Bowlby. However, he profoundly disagreed with the prevalent psychoanalytic belief that infants' responses relate to their internal fantasy life rather than real-life events. As Bowlby formulated his concepts, he was influenced by case studies on disturbed and delinquent children, such as those of William Goldfarb published in 1943 and 1945. Bowlby's contemporary René Spitz observed separated children's grief, proposing that \"psychotoxic\" results were brought about by inappropriate experiences of early care. A strong influence was the work of social worker and psychoanalyst James Robertson who filmed the effects of separation on children in hospital. He and Bowlby collaborated in making the 1952 documentary film \"A Two-Year Old Goes to the Hospital\" which was instrumental in a campaign to alter hospital restrictions on visits by parents.\n\nIn his 1951 monograph for the World Health Organization, \"Maternal Care and Mental Health\", Bowlby put forward the hypothesis that \"the infant and young child should experience a warm, intimate, and continuous relationship with his mother in which both find satisfaction and enjoyment\", the lack of which may have significant and irreversible mental health consequences. This was also published as \"Child Care and the Growth of Love\" for public consumption. The central proposition was influential but highly controversial. At the time there was limited empirical data and no comprehensive theory to account for such a conclusion. Nevertheless, Bowlby's theory sparked considerable interest in the nature of early relationships, giving a strong impetus to, (in the words of Mary Ainsworth), a \"great body of research\" in an extremely difficult, complex area. Bowlby's work (and Robertson's films) caused a virtual revolution in hospital visiting by parents, hospital provision for children's play, educational and social needs and the use of residential nurseries. Over time, orphanages were abandoned in favour of foster care or family-style homes in most developed countries.\nFollowing the publication of \"Maternal Care and Mental Health\", Bowlby sought new understanding from the fields of evolutionary biology, ethology, developmental psychology, cognitive science and control systems theory. He formulated the innovative proposition that mechanisms underlying an infant's emotional tie to the caregiver(s) emerged as a result of evolutionary pressure. He set out to develop a theory of motivation and behaviour control built on science rather than Freud's psychic energy model. Bowlby argued that with attachment theory he had made good the \"deficiencies of the data and the lack of theory to link alleged cause and effect\" of \"Maternal Care and Mental Health\".\n\nBowlby's attention was first drawn to ethology when he read Konrad Lorenz's 1952 publication in draft form (although Lorenz had published earlier work). Other important influences were ethologists Nikolaas Tinbergen and Robert Hinde. Bowlby subsequently collaborated with Hinde. In 1953 Bowlby stated \"the time is ripe for a unification of psychoanalytic concepts with those of ethology, and to pursue the rich vein of research which this union suggests.\" Konrad Lorenz had examined the phenomenon of \"imprinting\", a behaviour characteristic of some birds and mammals which involves rapid learning of recognition by the young, of a conspecific or comparable object. After recognition comes a tendency to follow.\nCertain types of learning are possible, respective to each applicable type of learning, only within a limited age range known as a critical period. Bowlby's concepts included the idea that attachment involved learning from experience during a limited age period, influenced by adult behaviour. He did not apply the imprinting concept in its entirety to human attachment. However, he considered that attachment behaviour was best explained as instinctive, combined with the effect of experience, stressing the readiness the child brings to social interactions. Over time it became apparent there were more differences than similarities between attachment theory and imprinting so the analogy was dropped. Ethologists expressed concern about the adequacy of some research on which attachment theory was based, particularly the generalization to humans from animal studies. Schur, discussing Bowlby's use of ethological concepts (pre-1960) commented that concepts used in attachment theory had not kept up with changes in ethology itself. Ethologists and others writing in the 1960s and 1970s questioned and expanded the types of behaviour used as indications of attachment. Observational studies of young children in natural settings provided other behaviours that might indicate attachment; for example, staying within a predictable distance of the mother without effort on her part and picking up small objects, bringing them to the mother but not to others. Although ethologists tended to be in agreement with Bowlby, they pressed for more data, objecting to psychologists writing as if there were an \"entity which is 'attachment', existing over and above the observable measures.\" Robert Hinde considered \"attachment behaviour system\" to be an appropriate term which did not offer the same problems \"because it refers to postulated control systems that determine the relations between different kinds of behaviour.\"\n\nPsychoanalytic concepts influenced Bowlby's view of attachment, in particular, the observations by Anna Freud and Dorothy Burlingham of young children separated from familiar caregivers during World War II. However, Bowlby rejected psychoanalytical explanations for early infant bonds including \"drive theory\" in which the motivation for attachment derives from gratification of hunger and libidinal drives. He called this the \"cupboard-love\" theory of relationships. In his view it failed to see attachment as a psychological bond in its own right rather than an instinct derived from feeding or sexuality. Based on ideas of primary attachment and Neo-Darwinism, Bowlby identified what he saw as fundamental flaws in psychoanalysis: the overemphasis of internal dangers rather than external threat, and the view of the development of personality via linear \"phases\" with \"regression\" to fixed points accounting for psychological distress. Bowlby instead posited that several lines of development were possible, the outcome of which depended on the interaction between the organism and the environment. In attachment this would mean that although a developing child has a propensity to form attachments, the nature of those attachments depends on the environment to which the child is exposed.\n\nFrom early in the development of attachment theory there was criticism of the theory's lack of congruence with various branches of psychoanalysis. Bowlby's decisions left him open to criticism from well-established thinkers working on similar problems.\n\nThe philosopher Kenneth Craik had noted the ability of thought to predict events. He stressed the survival value of natural selection for this ability. This internal working model allows a person to try out alternatives mentally, using knowledge of the past while responding to the present and future. Bowlby applied Craik's ideas to attachment, when other psychologists were applying these concepts to adult perception and cognition.\n\nAn infant's internal working model is developed in response to the infant's experience of the outcomes of his or her proximity-seeking behaviors. If the caregiver is accepting of these proximity-seeking behaviors and grants access, the infant develops a secure organization; if the caregiver consistently denies the infant access, an avoidant organization develops; and if the caregiver inconsistently grants access, an ambivalent organization develops.\n\nA parent's internal working model that is operative in the attachment relationship with her infant can be accessed by examining the parent's mental representations. Recent research has demonstrated that the quality of maternal attributions as markers of maternal mental representations can be associated with particular forms of maternal psychopathology and can be altered in a relative short time-period by targeted psychotherapeutic intervention.\n\nIn the 1970s, problems with viewing attachment as a trait (stable characteristic of an individual) rather than as a type of behaviour with organising functions and outcomes, led some authors to the conclusion that attachment behaviours were best understood in terms of their functions in the child's life. This way of thinking saw the secure base concept as central to attachment theory's logic, coherence, and status as an organizational construct. Following this argument, the assumption that attachment is expressed identically in all humans cross-culturally was examined. The research showed that though there were cultural differences, the three basic patterns, secure, avoidant and ambivalent, can be found in every culture in which studies have been undertaken, even where communal sleeping arrangements are the norm.Selection of the secure pattern is found in the majority of children across cultures studied. This follows logically from the fact that attachment theory provides for infants to adapt to changes in the environment, selecting optimal behavioural strategies. How attachment is expressed shows cultural variations which need to be ascertained before studies can be undertaken; for example Gusii infants are greeted with a handshake rather than a hug. Securely attached Gusii infants anticipate and seek this contact. There are also differences in the distribution of insecure patterns based on cultural differences in child-rearing practices. The scholar Michael Rutter in 1974 studied the importance of distinguishing between the consequences of attachment deprivation upon intellectual retardation in children and lack of development in the emotional growth in children. Rutter's conclusion was that a careful delineation of maternal attributes needed to be identified and differentiated for progress in the field to continue.\n\nThe biggest challenge to the notion of the universality of attachment theory came from studies conducted in Japan where the concept of \"amae\" plays a prominent role in describing family relationships. Arguments revolved around the appropriateness of the use of the Strange Situation procedure where \"amae\" is practiced. Ultimately research tended to confirm the universality hypothesis of attachment theory. Most recently a 2007 study conducted in Sapporo in Japan found attachment distributions consistent with global norms using the six-year Main and Cassidy scoring system for attachment classification.\n\nCritics in the 1990s such as J. R. Harris, Steven Pinker and Jerome Kagan were generally concerned with the concept of infant determinism (nature versus nurture), stressing the effects of later experience on personality. Building on the work on temperament of Stella Chess, Kagan rejected almost every assumption on which attachment theory's cause was based. Kagan argued that heredity was far more important than the transient developmental effects of early environment. For example, a child with an inherently difficult temperament would not elicit sensitive behavioural responses from a caregiver. The debate spawned considerable research and analysis of data from the growing number of longitudinal studies. Subsequent research has not borne out Kagan's argument, possibly suggesting that it is the caregiver's behaviours that form the child's attachment style, although how this style is expressed may differ with the child's temperament. Harris and Pinker put forward the notion that the influence of parents had been much exaggerated, arguing that socialization took place primarily in peer groups. H. Rudolph Schaffer concluded that parents and peers had different functions, fulfilling distinctive roles in children's development. Psychoanalyst/psychologists Peter Fonagy and Mary Target have attempted to bring attachment theory and psychoanalysis into a closer relationship through cognitive science as mentalization. Mentalization, or theory of mind, is the capacity of human beings to guess with some accuracy what thoughts, emotions and intentions lie behind behaviours as subtle as facial expression. It has been speculated that this connection between theory of mind and the internal working model may open new areas of study, leading to alterations in attachment theory. Since the late 1980s, there has been a developing rapprochement between attachment theory and psychoanalysis, based on common ground as elaborated by attachment theorists and researchers, and a change in what psychoanalysts consider to be central to psychoanalysis. Object relations models which emphasise the autonomous need for a relationship have become dominant and are linked to a growing recognition within psychoanalysis of the importance of infant development in the context of relationships and internalized representations. Psychoanalysis has recognized the formative nature of a child's early environment including the issue of childhood trauma. A psychoanalytically based exploration of the attachment system and an accompanying clinical approach has emerged together with a recognition of the need for measurement of outcomes of interventions. \nOne focus of attachment research has been the difficulties of children whose attachment history was poor, including those with extensive non-parental child care experiences. Concern with the effects of child care was intense during the so-called \"day care wars\" of the late-20th century, during which some authors stressed the deleterious effects of day care. As a result of this controversy, training of child care professionals has come to stress attachment issues, including the need for relationship-building by the assignment of a child to a specific care-giver. Although only high-quality child care settings are likely to provide this, more infants in child care receive attachment-friendly care than in the past. A natural experiment permitted extensive study of attachment issues as researchers followed thousands of Romanian orphans adopted into Western families after the end of the Nicolae Ceauşescu regime. The English and Romanian Adoptees Study Team, led by Michael Rutter, followed some of the children into their teens, attempting to unravel the effects of poor attachment, adoption, new relationships, physical problems and medical issues associated with their early lives. Studies of these adoptees, whose initial conditions were shocking, yielded reason for optimism as many of the children developed quite well. Researchers noted that separation from familiar people is only one of many factors that help to determine the quality of development. Although higher rates of atypical insecure attachment patterns were found compared to native-born or early-adopted samples, 70% of later-adopted children exhibited no marked or severe attachment disorder behaviours.\n\nAuthors considering attachment in non-Western cultures have noted the connection of attachment theory with Western family and child care patterns characteristic of Bowlby's time. As children's experience of care changes, so may attachment-related experiences. For example, changes in attitudes toward female sexuality have greatly increased the numbers of children living with their never-married mothers or being cared for outside the home while the mothers work. This social change has made it more difficult for childless people to adopt infants in their own countries. There has been an increase in the number of older-child adoptions and adoptions from third-world sources in first-world countries. Adoptions and births to same-sex couples have increased in number and gained legal protection, compared to their status in Bowlby's time. Issues have been raised to the effect that the dyadic model characteristic of attachment theory cannot address the complexity of real-life social experiences, as infants often have multiple relationships within the family and in child care settings. It is suggested these multiple relationships influence one another reciprocally, at least within a family.\n\nPrinciples of attachment theory have been used to explain adult social behaviours, including mating, social dominance and hierarchical power structures, in-group identification, group coalitions, and negotiation of reciprocity and justice. Those explanations have been used to design parental care training, and have been particularly successful in the design of child abuse prevention programmes.\n\nWhile a wide variety of studies have upheld the basic tenets of attachment theory, research has been inconclusive as to whether self-reported early attachment and later depression are demonstrably related.\n\nIn addition to longitudinal studies, there has been psychophysiological research on the biology of attachment. Research has begun to include neural development, behaviour genetics and temperament concepts. Generally, temperament and attachment constitute separate developmental domains, but aspects of both contribute to a range of interpersonal and intrapersonal developmental outcomes. Some types of temperament may make some individuals susceptible to the stress of unpredictable or hostile relationships with caregivers in the early years. In the absence of available and responsive caregivers it appears that some children are particularly vulnerable to developing attachment disorders.\n\nIn psychophysiological research on attachment, the two main areas studied have been autonomic responses, such as heart rate or respiration, and the activity of the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis. Infants' physiological responses have been measured during the Strange Situation procedure looking at individual differences in infant temperament and the extent to which attachment acts as a moderator. There is some evidence that the quality of caregiving shapes the development of the neurological systems which regulate stress.\n\nAnother issue is the role of inherited genetic factors in shaping attachments: for example one type of polymorphism of the gene coding for the D dopamine receptor has been linked to anxious attachment and another in the gene for the 5-HT serotonin receptor with avoidant attachment. This suggests that the influence of maternal care on attachment security is not the same for all children. One theoretical basis for this is that it makes biological sense for children to vary in their susceptibility to rearing influence.\n\nAs a theory of socioemotional development, attachment theory has implications and practical applications in social policy, decisions about the care and welfare of children and mental health.\n\nSocial policies concerning the care of children were the driving force in Bowlby's development of attachment theory. The difficulty lies in applying attachment concepts to policy and practice. In 2008 C.H. Zeanah and colleagues stated, \"Supporting early child-parent relationships is an increasingly prominent goal of mental health practitioners, community-based service providers and policy makers ... Attachment theory and research have generated important findings concerning early child development and spurred the creation of programs to support early child-parent relationships.\"\n\nHistorically, attachment theory had significant policy implications for hospitalized or institutionalized children, and those in poor quality daycare. Controversy remains over whether non-maternal care, particularly in group settings, has deleterious effects on social development. It is plain from research that poor quality care carries risks but that those who experience good quality alternative care cope well although it is difficult to provide good quality, individualized care in group settings.\n\nAttachment theory has implications in residence and contact disputes, and applications by foster parents to adopt foster children. In the past, particularly in North America, the main theoretical framework was psychoanalysis. Increasingly attachment theory has replaced it, thus focusing on the quality and continuity of caregiver relationships rather than economic well-being or automatic precedence of any one party, such as the biological mother. Rutter noted that in the UK, since 1980, family courts have shifted considerably to recognize the complications of attachment relationships. Children tend to have attachment relationships with both parents and often grandparents or other relatives. Judgements need to take this into account along with the impact of step-families. Attachment theory has been crucial in highlighting the importance of social relationships in dynamic rather than fixed terms.\n\nAttachment theory can also inform decisions made in social work, especially in humanistic social work (Petru Stefaroi), and court processes about foster care or other placements. Considering the child's attachment needs can help determine the level of risk posed by placement options. Within adoption, the shift from \"closed\" to \"open\" adoptions and the importance of the search for biological parents would be expected on the basis of attachment theory. Many researchers in the field were strongly influenced by it.\n\nAlthough attachment theory has become a major scientific theory of socioemotional development with one of the widest research lines in modern psychology, it has, until recently, been less used in clinical practice.\nThe attachment theory focused on the attention of the child when the mother is there and the responses that the child shows when the mother leaves, which indicated the attachment and bonding of the mother and the child. The attention therapy is the done while the child is being restrained by the therapists and the responses displayed were noted. The tests were done to show the responses of the child.\n\nThis may be partly due to lack of attention paid to clinical application by Bowlby himself and partly due to broader meanings of the word 'attachment' used amongst practitioners. It may also be partly due to the mistaken association of attachment theory with the pseudoscientific interventions misleadingly known as \"attachment therapy\".\n\nIn 1988, Bowlby published a series of lectures indicating how attachment theory and research could be used in understanding and treating child and family disorders. His focus for bringing about change was the parents' internal working models, parenting behaviours and the parents' relationship with the therapeutic intervenor. Ongoing research has led to a number of individual treatments and prevention and intervention programmes. In regards to personal development, children from all the age groups were tested to show the effectiveness of the theory that is being theorized by Bowlby They range from individual therapy to public health programmes to interventions designed for foster caregivers. For infants and younger children, the focus is on increasing the responsiveness and sensitivity of the caregiver, or if that is not possible, placing the child with a different caregiver. An assessment of the attachment status or caregiving responses of the caregiver is invariably included, as attachment is a two-way process involving attachment behaviour and caregiver response. Some programmes are aimed at foster carers because the attachment behaviours of infants or children with attachment difficulties often do not elicit appropriate caregiver responses. Modern prevention and intervention programmes have proven successful.\n\nOne atypical attachment pattern is considered to be an actual disorder, known as \"reactive attachment disorder\" or RAD, which is a recognized psychiatric diagnosis (ICD-10 F94.1/2 and DSM-IV-TR 313.89). Against common misconception, this is not the same as 'disorganized attachment'. The essential feature of reactive attachment disorder is markedly disturbed and developmentally inappropriate social relatedness in most contexts that begins before age five years, associated with gross pathological care. There are two subtypes, one reflecting a disinhibited attachment pattern, the other an inhibited pattern. RAD is not a description of insecure attachment styles, however problematic those styles may be; instead, it denotes a lack of age-appropriate attachment behaviours that may appear to resemble a clinical disorder. Although the term \"reactive attachment disorder\" is now popularly applied to perceived behavioural difficulties that fall outside the DSM or ICD criteria, particularly on the Web and in connection with the pseudo-scientific attachment therapy, \"true\" RAD is thought to be rare.\n\n\"Attachment disorder\" is an ambiguous term, which may be used to refer to reactive attachment disorder or to the more problematical insecure attachment styles (although none of these are clinical disorders). It may also be used to refer to proposed new classification systems put forward by theorists in the field, and is used within attachment therapy as a form of unvalidated diagnosis. One of the proposed new classifications, \"secure base distortion\" has been found to be associated with caregiver traumatization.\n\nAs attachment theory offers a broad, far-reaching view of human functioning, it can enrich a therapist's understanding of patients and the therapeutic relationship rather than dictate a particular form of treatment. Some forms of psychoanalysis-based therapy for adults—within relational psychoanalysis and other approaches—also incorporate attachment theory and patterns. In the first decade of the 21st century, key concepts of attachment were incorporated into existing models of behavioural couple therapy, multidimensional family therapy and couple and family therapy. Specifically attachment-centred interventions have been developed, such as attachment-based family therapy and emotionally focused therapy.\n\nAttachment theory and research laid the foundation for the development of the understanding of \"mentalization\" or reflective functioning and its presence, absence or distortion in psychopathology. The dynamics of an individual's attachment organization and their capacity for mentalization or conceptualization can play a crucial role in the capacity to be helped by treatment.\n\n\n", "id": "884589", "title": "Attachment theory"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=328352", "text": "Anastomosis\n\nAn anastomosis (plural anastomoses) is a connection or opening between two things (especially cavities or passages) that are normally diverging or branching, such as between blood vessels, leaf veins, or streams. Such a connection may be normal (such as the foramen ovale in a fetus's heart) or abnormal (such as the patent foramen ovale in an adult's heart); it may be acquired (such as an arteriovenous fistula) or innate (such as the arteriovenous shunt of a metarteriole); and it may be natural (such as the aforementioned examples) or artificial (such as a surgical anastomosis). The reestablishment of an anastomosis that had become blocked is called a reanastomosis. Anastomoses that are abnormal, whether congenital or acquired, are often called fistulas.\n\nThe term is used in medicine, biology, mycology, geology, geography and architecture.\n\nAnastomosis: medical or Modern Latin, from Greek ἀναστόμωσις, anastomosis, \"outlet, opening\", Gr ana- \"up, on, upon\", stoma \"mouth\", \"to furnish with a mouth\". Thus the \"-stom-\" syllable is cognate with that of \"stoma\" in botany or \"stoma\" in medicine.\n\nAn anastomosis is the connection of two normally divergent structures. It refers to connections between blood vessels or between other tubular structures such as loops of intestine.\n\nIn circulatory anastomoses, many arteries naturally anastomose with each other; for example, the inferior epigastric artery and superior epigastric artery, or the anterior and/or posterior communicating arteries in the Circle of Willis in the brain. The circulatory anastomosis is further divided into arterial and venous anastomosis. Arterial anastomosis includes actual arterial anastomosis (e.g., palmar arch, plantar arch) and potential arterial anastomosis (e.g. coronary arteries and cortical branch of cerebral arteries). Anastomoses also form alternative routes around capillary beds in areas that don't need a large blood supply, thus helping regulate systemic blood flow.\n\nAn example of surgical anastomosis occurs when a segment of intestine is resected and the two remaining ends are sewn or stapled together (anastomosed). The procedure is referred to as intestinal anastomosis. Other examples include Roux-en-Y anastomosis or ureteroureterostomy.\n\nPathological anastomosis results from trauma or disease and may involve veins, arteries, or intestines. These are usually referred to as fistulas. In the cases of veins or arteries, traumatic fistulas usually occur between artery and vein. Traumatic intestinal fistulas usually occur between two loops of intestine (entero-enteric fistula) or intestine and skin (enterocutaneous fistula). Portacaval anastomosis, by contrast, is an anastomosis between a vein of the portal circulation and a vein of the systemic circulation, which allows blood to bypass the liver in patients with portal hypertension, often resulting in hemorrhoids, esophageal varices, or caput medusae.\n\nIn evolution, anastomosis is a recombination of evolutionary lineage. Conventional accounts of evolutionary lineage present themselves as the simple branching out of species into novel forms. Under anastomosis, species might recombine after initial branching out, such as in the case of recent research that shows that ancestral populations along human and chimpanzee lineages may have interbred after an initial branching event. The concept of anastomosis also applies to the theory of symbiogenesis, in which new species emerge from the formation of novel symbiotic relationships.\n\nIn mycology, anastomosis is the fusion between branches of the same or different hyphae. Hence the bifurcating fungal hyphae can form true reticulating networks. By sharing materials in the form of dissolved ions, hormones, and nucleotides, the fungus maintains bidirectional communication with itself. The fungal network might begin from several origins; several spores (\"i.e.\" by means of conidial anastomosis tubes), several points of penetration, each a spreading circumference of absorption and assimilation. Once encountering the tip of another expanding, exploring self, the tips press against each other in pheromonal recognition or by an unknown recognition system, fusing to form a genetic singular clonal colony that can cover hectares called a genet or just microscopical areas.\n\nFor fungi, anastomosis is also a component of reproduction. In some fungi, two different haploid mating types – if compatible – merge. Somatically, they form a morphologically similar mycelial wave front that continues to grow and explore. The significant difference, is that each septated unit is binucleate, containing two unfused nuclei, i.e., one from each parent that eventually undergoes karyogamy and meiosis to complete the sexual cycle.\n\nAlso the term \"anastomosing\" is used for mushroom gills which interlink and separate to form a network.\n\nIn geology, anastomosis refers to quartz (or other) veins displaying this property, which is often related to shearing in metamorphic regions.\n\nAnastomosing streams consist of multiple channels that divide and reconnect and are separated by semi-permanent banks formed of cohesive material, such that they are unlikely to migrate from one channel position to another. They can be confused with braiding, the splitting of a river by sand bars or hard rocks and some definitions require that an anastomosing river be made up of interconnected channels that enclose floodbasins. Rivers with anastomosed reaches include the Magdalena River in Colombia, the upper Columbia River in British Columbia, Canada, and the upper Narew River in Poland. The term anabranch has been used for segments of anastamosing rivers.\n", "id": "328352", "title": "Anastomosis"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12185843", "text": "Comparative cognition\n\nComparative cognition is the comparative study of the mechanisms and origins of cognition in various species.\nFrom a biological point of view, work is being done on the brains of fruit flies that should yield techniques precise enough to allow an understanding of the workings of the human brain on a scale appreciative of individual groups of neurons rather than the more regional scale previously used. Similarly, gene activity in the human brain is better understood through examination of the brains of mice by the Seattle-based Allen Institute for Brain Science (see link below), yielding the freely available Allen Brain Atlas. This type of study is related to comparative cognition, but better classified as one of comparative genomics. Increasing emphasis in psychology and ethology on the biological aspects of perception and behavior is bridging the gap between genomics and behavioral analysis.\n\n\n", "id": "12185843", "title": "Comparative cognition"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25863044", "text": "Mesowear\n\nMesowear is a method, used in different branches and fields of biology. This method can apply to both extant and extinct animals, according to the scope of the study. Mesowear is based on studying an animal's tooth wearing fingerprint. In brief, each animal has special feeding habits, which cause unique tooth wearing. Rough feeds cause serious tooth abrasion, while smooth one triggers moderate abrasion, so browsers have teeth with moderate abrasion and grazers have teeth with rough abrasion. Scoring systems can quantify tooth abrasion observations and ease comparisons between individuals.\n\nThe mesowear method or tooth wear scoring method is a quick and inexpensive process of determining the lifelong diet of a taxon (grazer or browser) and was first introduced in the year 2000.\nThe mesowear technique can be extended to extinct and also extant animals.\nMesowear analyses require large sample populations (>20), which can be problematic for some localities, but the method yields an accurate depiction of an animal's average lifelong diet. mesowear analysis, is based on the physical properties of ungulate foods as reflected in the relative amounts of attritive and abrasive wear that they cause on the dental enamel of the occlusal surfaces. Mesowear was recorded by examining the buccal apices of molar tooth cusps. Apices were characterized as sharp, rounded, or blunt, and the valleys between them either high or low. The method has been developed only for selenodont and trilophodont molars, but the principle is readily extendable to other crown types.In collecting the data the teeth are inspected at close range, a hand lens will be used. Mesowear analysis is insensitive to wear stage as long as the very early and very late stages are excluded.\nMesowear analysis follows standard protocols. Specimens are digitally photographed in labial view so that cusp shape and occlusal relief can be scored.\nthis method helps zoologists and nutritionists to prepare proper kind of hay for captive feral herbivores with unknown feed habits in zoos.\nIn collecting the data the teeth are inspected at close range, using a hand lens.\nGravity toward lower teeth causes more abrasion on lower teeth than upper theeth. This fact is base of mesowear method\nsharp: A sharp cusp terminates to a point and has practically no rounded area between the \nmesial and distal phase I facets,\nRound: a rounded cusp has a distinctly rounded tip (apex) without planar\nfacet wear but retains facets on the lower slopes.\n\nBlunt: blunt cusp lacks distinct facets altogether.\n\nThe attrition: this kind of dental wearing is as a result of rubbing tooth to tooth and no external forces cause this enamel abrasion.usually browsers feed contains less food abrasive materials( such as silica because of feed selecting behavior in this animals so wearing type of browser ungulates will be this type in most cases.\n\nThe abrasion: rubbing food to tooth triggers this kind of tooth wearing more visible for grazer animals than browsers.\n\n", "id": "25863044", "title": "Mesowear"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19086594", "text": "Debate about Cambrian lophotrochozoans\n\nSince 1990 there has been intense debate among paleontologists about the evolution in the Early Cambrian period of the \"super-phylum\" Lophotrochozoa, which is thought to include the modern molluscs, annelid worms and brachiopods, as well as their evolutionary \"aunts\" and \"cousins\".\n\nThe name \"halwaxiid\" was formed by combining the names of two members of the proposed group, \"Halkieria\" and \"Wiwaxia\". The group was defined as a set of Early to Mid Cambrian animals that had: a \"chain mail\" coat of three concentric bands of small armor plates that are called sclerites; in some cases, a small cap-like shell at the front end and in some cases both ends. Some scientists are unhappy with this loose definition, arguing that such traits may have arisen convergently rather being inherited from a common ancestor. This objection suggests that the group is not monophyletic, in other words that the group does not contain all and only the descendants of a single common ancestor. In fact the originators of the term \"halwaxiid\" prefer an evolutionary \"family tree\" in which the halwaxiids are not monophyletic.\n\nOther fossil organisms became involved in the debate as there were plausible arguments for considering them closely related to the halkieriids or \"Wiwaxia\" or both. One was the more recently discovered \"Orthrozanclus\", which looked an intermediate between the halkieriids and \"Wiwaxia\" as it had a shell like that of halkieriids, and unmineralized sclerites and long spines like those of \"Wiwaxia\" – in fact the article which first described \"Orthrozanclus\" introduced the term \"halwaxiid\". New finds of \"Odontogriphus\" put this animal into play as well since, despite its lack of sclerites or shells, its feeding apparatus looks very like \"Wiwaxia\"’s. The siphogonotuchids, a very Early Cambrian group known only from isolated sclerites among the small shelly fossils, also appear in analyses as their sclerites suggest this group may have been close to the ancestors of halkieriids.\n\nSince 1995 several phylogenies, or evolutionary \"family trees\", have been suggested for these organisms. The position of \"Wiwaxia\" is highlighted, since the position of this organism has been central to the debate since 1990.\n\nThe most intense part of the debate centers round \"Wiwaxia\". Conway Morris (1985) originally dismissed the earliest classification of \"Wiwaxia\" as a polychaete worm, because he thought there was little structural similarity between a polychaete's scale-like elytra and \"Wiwaxia\"’s sclerites, and because the arrangement of the sclerites, with quite different numbers in each band, showed no sign of the regular segmentation that is a feature of polychaetes. Instead he thought \"Wiwaxia\" was very similar to shell-less aplacophoran molluscs, that it must have moved on a mollusc-like muscular foot, and that its feeding apparatus looked like a primitive form of the molluscan radula, a tooth-bearing chitinous \"tongue\". Hence he classified it as a \"sister\" of the molluscs. When he briefly described the first articulated specimens of \"Halkieria\" in 1990, Conway Morris wrote of \"the halkieriid-wiwaxiid body plan\" and that the halkieriids might be close relatives of molluscs.\nShortly after this in 1990 Butterfield published his first paper on \"Wiwaxia\". He argued that, since \"Wiwaxia\"’s sclerites appeared to be solid, they were not similar to the hollow sclerites of halkieriids. In fact he thought they were more similar to the chitinous bristles (setae) that project from the bodies of modern annelids and in some genera form leaf-like scales that cover the back like roof tiles - in composition, in detailed structure, in how they were attached to the body via follicle-like pockets in the skin, and in overall appearance. He also contended that Wiwaxia’s feeding apparatus, instead of being mounted in the middle of its \"head\", was just as likely to be mounted in two parts on the sides of the \"head\", an arrangement that is common in polychaetes. He therefore classified \"Wiwaxia\" as a polychaete.\n\nConway Morris and Peel (1995) largely accepted Butterfield's arguments and treated \"Wiwaxia\" as an ancestor or \"aunt\" of the polychaetes. However they maintained that Wiwaxia’s feeding apparatus was much more like a molluscan radula. They also argued that Wiwaxia was fairly closely related to and in fact descended from the halkieriids, as the sclerites are divided into similar groups, although those of halkieriids were much smaller, more numerous and hollow. They wrote that in 1994 Butterfield had found \"Wiwaxia\" sclerites that were clearly hollow. The cladogram they presented showed the halkieriids split into three groups: one as \"aunts\" of brachiopods, animals whose modern forms have bivalve shells but differ from molluscs in having muscular stalks and a distinctive feeding apparatus, the lophophore; the second group of halkieriids as \"aunts\" of both \"Wiwaxia\" and annelid worms; and the earliest halkieriids as \"great aunts\" of all of these.\n\nMarine biologist Amélie H. Scheltema \"et al.\" (2003) argued that \"Wiwaxia\"’s feeding apparatus is very similar to the radulas of some modern shell-less aplacophoran molluscs, and that the sclerites of the two groups are very similar. They concluded that \"Wiwaxia\" was a member of a clade that includes molluscs.\nDanish zoologist Danny Eibye-Jacobsen (2004) regarded bristles as a feature shared by molluscs, annelids and brachiopods. Hence even if \"Wiwaxia\"’s sclerites closely resembled bristles, which he doubted, this would not prove that \"Wiwaxia\"’s closest relative were annelids. He also pointed out that the very different numbers of sclerites in the various zones of \"Wiwaxia\"’s body do not correspond to any reasonable pattern of segmentation. Since in his opinion \"Wiwaxia\" lacked other clearly polychaete features, he regarded this as an argument against classifying \"Wiwaxia\" as a polychaete. In his opinion there were no strong grounds for classifying \"Wiwaxia\" as a proto-annelid or a proto-mollusc.\n\nCaron, Scheltema \"et al.\" (2006), in a paper about newly discovered and good specimens of \"Odontogriphus\", thought \"Wiwaxia\" bore little resemblance to polychaetes as it showed no signs of the segmentation, appendages in front of the mouth, or \"legs\" – all of which are typical polychaete features. On the other hand they thought the teeth on the feeding apparatus of both \"Wiwaxia\" and \"Odontogriphus\" strongly resembled those of a modern group of molluscs, Neomeniomorpha. Hence they classified \"Wiwaxia\" as an \"aunt\" and \"Odontogriphus\" as a \"great aunt\" of molluscs.\n\nButterfield returned to the debate in 2006, repeating the arguments he presented in 1990 for regarding \"Wiwaxia\" as an early polychaete and adding that, while bristles are a feature of several groups, they appear as a covering over the back only in polychaetes. He also questioned whether the two or three rows of teeth in \"Wiwaxia\" and \"Odontogriphus\" could function in the same way as the belt-like molluscan radula with its many tooth-rows; on the other hand one group of polychaetes uses a single two-part \"jaw\" to scrape food off a substrate. While he agreed that \"Wiwaxia\" and \"Odontogriphus\" were very similar, he wrote, \"… it certainly does not require that they be shoehorned into the same lineage. … the seemingly trivial distinction between these two taxa is exactly what is expected at the divergence points leading from a last common ancestor to extant phyla.\"\n\nButterfield (2006) accepted that \"Wiwaxia\" and \"Odontogriphus\" were closely related, but argued that they were stem-group polychaetes rather than stem-group molluscs. In his opinion the feeding apparatus of these organisms, with consisted of two or at most four rows of teeth, could not perform the functions of the \"belt-like\" molluscan radula with their numerous tooth-rows; the different tooth-rows in both \"Wiwaxia\" and \"Odontogriphus\" tooth-rows also have noticeably different shapes, while those of molluscan radulae are produced one after the other by the same group of \"factory\" cells and therefore are almost identical. He also regarded lines running across the middle region of \"Odontogriphus\" fossils as evidence of external segmentation, since the lines are evenly spaced and run exactly at right angles to the long axis of the body. As in his earlier papers, Butterfield emphasized the similarities of internal structure between \"Wiwaxia\"’s sclerites and the bristles of polychaetes, and the fact that polychaetes are the only modern organisms in which some of the bristles form a covering over the back.\n\nIn 2007 Conway Morris and Caron described a new fossil, \"Orthrozanclus\", which had a mineralized shell like that of halkieriids, and unmineralized sclerites and long spines like those of \"Wiwaxia\" – and, like both of these, a soft underside which they interpreted as a muscular foot, and a similar arrangement of the sclerites into three concentric bands. Some of \"Orthrozanclus\"’s sclerites appear to have been hollow, as the specimen includes what look like internal castings. They took this find as evidence that the halkieriids, \"Wiwaxia\" and \"Orthrozanclus\" were very closely related and formed the group \"halwaxiids\". However the simplest \"family tree\" faces an obstacle: the siphogonuchitids appear in earlier rocks and had \"mineralized\" sclerites. Hence Conway Morris and Caron found it necessary to consider two more complex family trees, concluding that \"Hypothesis 1\" fitted the available data better, but fell apart if there were minor changes in the characteristics used:\n\nConway Morris and Caron (2007) published the first description of \"Orthrozanclus reburrus\". This resembled the halkieriids in having concentric bands of sclerites, although only two and not mineralized; and \"one\" shell at what was presumed to be the front and which was similar in shape to \"Halkieria\"’s front shell. It also had long spines rather like those of \"Wiwaxia\". Conway Morris and Caron regarded this creature as evidence that the \"halwaxiids\" were a valid taxon and were monophyletic, in other words shared a common ancestor with each other and with no other organism. They published \"two\" cladograms, representing alternative hypotheses about the evolution of the lophotrochozoa, the lineage that includes molluscs, annelids and brachiopods:\n\nMost of the debate has been about halkieriids' relationship to molluscs, annelids and brachiopods. However a paper published in 2008 argued that halkieriids were closely related to chancelloriids, which have been generally regarded as sponges.\n\nHalkieriid sclerites were known for a long time as elements of the small shelly fossils. The first articulated specimens, with all their hard parts together, were collected in 1989 and were described briefly in 1990 by Conway Morris and Peel (1990). The same authors produced a more detailed analysis in 1995, which divided the halkieriids into three groups: one as \"aunts\" of brachiopods, animals whose modern forms have bivalve shells but differ from molluscs in having muscular stalks and a distinctive feeding apparatus, the lophophore; the second group of halkieriids as \"aunts\" of both \"Wiwaxia\" and annelid worms; and the earliest halkieriids as \"great aunts\" of all of these.\n\nIn 2003 Cohen, Holmer and Luter supported the halkieriid-brachiopod relationship, suggesting that brachiopods may have arisen from a halkieriid lineage that developed a shorter body and larger shells, and then folded itself and finally grew a stalk out of what used to be the back.\n\nVinther and Nielsen (2005) proposed instead that \"Halkieria\" was a crown group mollusc, in other words more similar to modern molluscs than to annelids, brachiopods or any intermediate groups. They argued that: \"Halkieria\"’s sclerites resembled those of the modern solenogaster aplacophoran shell-less molluscs, of some modern polyplacophoran molluscs, which have several shell plates, and of the Ordovician polyplacophoran \"Echinochiton\"; \"Halkieria\"’s shells are more similar to the shells of conchiferan molluscs, since shells of both of these groups show no trace of the canals and pores seen in polyplacophoran shell plates; the bristles of brachiopods and annelids are similar to each other but not to \"Halkieria\"’s sclerites.\n\nHowever Conway Morris (2006) criticized Vinther and Nielsen's classification of \"Halkieria\" as a crown group mollusc, on the grounds that the growth of the spicules in the aplacophorans and polyplacophorans is not similar to the method of growth deduced for the complex halkieriid sclerites; in particular, he said, the hollow spines of various molluscs are not at all like the halkieriid sclerites with their complex internal channels. Conway Morris repeated his earlier conclusion that halkieriids were close to the ancestors of both molluscs and brachiopods.\n\nIn their description of the newly discovered \"Orthrozanclus\" (2007), which has similarities to both \"Wiwaxia\" and the halkieriids, Conway Morris and Caron also took account of the siphogonuchitids, a group known only from isolated mineralized sclerites that resemble those of the halkieriids. They proposed the two \"family trees\" described above:\n\nPorter (2008) revived an early 1980s idea that the sclerites of \"Halkieria\" are extremely similar to those of chancelloriids. These were sessile, bag-like, radially symmetric organisms with an opening at the top.\n\nSince their fossils show no signs of a gut or other organs, chancelloriids were originally classified as some kind of sponge. Butterfield and Nicholas (1996) argued that they were closely related to sponges on the grounds that the detailed structure of chancellorid sclerites is similar to that of fibers of spongin, a collagen protein, in modern keratose (horny) demosponges. However Janussen, Steiner and Zhu (2002) opposed this view on several grounds, including that: the silica-based spines of demosponges are solid, while chancellorid sclerites are hollow, probably made of aragonite, and filled with soft tissues connected to the rest of the animal at the bases of the sclerites; sponges have loosely bound-together skins called pinacoderms, which are only one cell thick, while the skins of chancellorids were much thicker and show signs of connective structures called belt desmosomes. In their opinion the presence of belt desmosomes made chancellorids members of the Epitheliazoa, the next higher taxon above the Porifera, to which sponges belong. They thought it was difficult to say whether chancellorids were members of the Eumetazoa, \"true animals\" whose tissues are organized into Germ layers: chancellorids' lack of internal organs would seem to exclude them from the Eumetazoa; but possibly chancellorids were descended from Eumetazoans that lost these features after becoming sessile filter-feeders.\n\nThe sclerites of halkieriids and chancelloriids resemble each other at all levels: both have an internal \"pulp cavity\" and a thin external organic layer; the walls are made of the same material, aragonite; the arrangement of the aragonite fibers in each is the same, running mainly from base to tip but with each being closer to the surface at the end nearest the tip. It is extremely improbable that totally unrelated organisms could have developed such similar sclerites independently, but the huge difference in the structures of their bodies makes it hard to see how they could be closely related. This dilemma may be resolved in various ways:\n", "id": "19086594", "title": "Debate about Cambrian lophotrochozoans"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1976413", "text": "Divergent evolution\n\nDivergent evolution is the accumulation of differences between groups, leading to the formation of new species.\n\nThe term can also be applied in molecular evolution, such as to proteins that derive from homologous genes. Both orthologous genes (resulting from a speciation event) and paralogous genes (resulting from gene duplication) can illustrate divergent evolution. Through gene duplication, it is possible for divergent evolution to occur between two genes within a species.\n\nSimilarities between species that have diverged are due to their common origin, so such similarities are homologies. In contrast, convergent evolution arises when an adaptation has arisen independently, creating analogous structures such as the wings of birds and of insects.\n\nJ. T. Gulick (1832-1923) was the first to use the term \"divergent evolution\"\n\nDivergent evolution occurs when a structure with a common origin is adapted in different ways in different lineages, as with vertebrate forelimbs which now form paddles in whales, wings in bats, hands in primates, and running legs in horses.\nDivergent evolution similarly split the human lineage from chimpanzees.\n\nDarwin's finches provide a good example of divergent evolution, where some 15 species diverged from a single species of finch that arrived on the Galapagos islands.\n\nThe divergent evolution of wolves and domesticated dogs from a common ancestor, perhaps the grey wolf, provides another example. Recent studies of the mitochondrial DNA of wolves and of domesticated dogs have found great divergence while also supporting the hypothesis that dogs descend from wolves.\n\nSpeciation, the divergence of one species into two or more descendant species, occurs when a part of the species is separated from the main population by a reproductive barrier. In allopatric and peripatric speciation, the reproductive barrier is the result of a physical barrier (e.g. flood waters, mountain range, deserts). Once separated, the species begins to adapt to their new environment via genetic drift and natural selection. After many generations and continual evolution, the populations become unable to interbreed with one another.\n\n", "id": "1976413", "title": "Divergent evolution"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16682228", "text": "EICA hypothesis\n\nThe evolution of increased competitive ability (EICA) hypothesis was first proposed by Bernd Blossey and Rolf Nötzold in 1995 as a way to explain the success of invasive, non-indigenous species (in particular, plants). Observing that:\nBecause of a lack of native predation, the scientists reasoned, introduced plants are able to reallocate resources from defense mechanisms into growth and development. Introduced plants can thereby evolve to grow taller, produce more biomass, and yield more viable offspring than their native counterparts, according to the hypothesis.\n\nBlossey and Nötzold tested their hypothesis on \"Lythrum salicaria\" (purple loosetrife) by potting seeds from plants growing in Ithaca, New York, U.S.A., and Lucelle, Switzerland. The seeds were allowed to germinate in a lab at Christian-Albrechts University in Kiel, northern Germany, and observed for two years. True to the predictions of the EICA Hypothesis, the plants derived from Ithaca produced significantly more biomass that the plants derived from Lucelle (with a p value <0.001). The \"Lythrum salicaria\" plants derived from Ithaca also grew taller and were significantly less resistant to the root-feeding weevil present over its native range.\n\nUnlike the notable ideas (concerning the success of invasive non-indigenous organisms) that preceded it, such as the enemy release hypothesis (ERH) and Charles Darwin's Habituation Hypothesis, the EICA hypothesis postulates that an invasive species is \"not\" as fit (in its introduced habitat) at its moment of introduction as it is at the time that it is considered invasive. As suggested by the name of the hypothesis (Evolution of Increased Competitive Ability), the hypothesis predicts that much of the invasive potential of an invasive species is derived from its ability to evolve to reallocate its resources.\n\nThis idea is troubling in that it adds a new variable to \"invasive potential\", making it harder to predict whether or not a species will become invasive if it is introduced into a new area. In other words, the EICA hypothesis presents a new environmental safety concern. If its postulates hold, in the long run, introduced species may have to be more highly regulated than they are at present, because no set of traits or pattern of introduction can predict the extent to which an organism can reallocate its resources in response to a release from stress.\n\nSince its debut in 1995, Bernd Blossey and Rolf Nötzold's paper, \"Evolution of increased competitive ability in invasive nonindigenous plants: a hypothesis\" has been met with varying degrees of enthusiasm. The paper has been cited in over 368 articles in scientific journals, including review articles, tests of the hypothesis using different model species, and expansions and reformulations of the hypothesis. Among the model species on which the hypothesis has been evaluated most recently (in its original form) are \"Solidago gigantea\" (giant goldenrod), \"Sapium sebiferum\" (Chinese Tallow), and \"Lepidium draba\" (whitetop). Of these three model species, the success and behavior of \"Sapium sebifurum\" agreed most closely with the postulates of the EICA Hypothesis, according to the researches conducting the study. In its study, the success and behavior of \"Solidago gigantea\" was only partially explained by the EICA hypothesis, according to its researchers. \"Lepidium draba\" did not seem to follow any of the postulates of the EICA Hypothesis, as the researchers of the study understood them.\n\nThrough most of the studies done on the EICA Hypothesis (see examples above), it holds that the introduced populations of invasive plant species are less able to cope with the pressures of specialist herbivores than native populations of the same species are, suggesting that invasive species \"do\" respond to accelerated natural selection after being released from the selective pressure of specialist herbivores and \"do\" have the potential to reallocate resources away from specific forms of defense. However, not all of these introduced populations produce significantly more biomass than the native populations of the same species under laboratory conditions. A study conducted by Bossdorf et al. in 2004 on \"Alliaria petiolata\" (garlic mustard) may lend some insight into this discrepancy. Bossdorf et al. potted seeds from native and introduced populations of \"Alliaria petiolata\" and put them in direct competition with one another in a laboratory setting (i.e. the native and introduced populations were grown on in the same pot of soil, and subjected to the same treatments), and found that in direct competition, the native populations were able to out-compete the invasive populations. Bossdorf et al. proposed that this observation could result from the fact that there is a fitness cost to traits that increase so-called \"competitive ability\". Under this assumption, invasive populations of \"Alliaria petiolata\" had evolved a higher fitness (similar to \"Lythrum Salicaria\") in their introduced ranges at the cost of certain defense mechanisms \"and\" at the cost of certain aspects of growth and development (dissimilar to \"Lythrum Salicaria\"). It could be, therefore, that the EICA Hypothesis is too narrow in scope, and should be reworded to place an emphasis on an invasive species' ability to reallocate its resources in order to procure a fitness advantage that may or may not involve more vigorous growth and development.\n", "id": "16682228", "title": "EICA hypothesis"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=308981", "text": "Vestigiality\n\nVestigiality is the retention during the process of evolution of genetically determined structures or attributes that have lost some or all of their ancestral function in a given species. Assessment of the vestigiality must generally rely on comparison with homologous features in related species. The emergence of vestigiality occurs by normal evolutionary processes, typically by loss of function of a feature that is no longer subject to positive selection pressures when it loses its value in a changing environment. The feature may be selected against more urgently when its function becomes definitively harmful, but if the lack of the feature provides no advantage, and its presence provides no disadvantage, the feature may not be phased out by natural selection and persist across species. Typical examples of both types occur in the loss of flying capability in island-dwelling species.\n\nVestigial features may take various forms; for example they may be patterns of behavior, anatomical structures, or biochemical processes. Like most other physical features, however functional, vestigial features in a given species may successively appear, develop, and persist or disappear at various stages within the life cycle of the organism, ranging from early embryonic development to late adulthood.\n\nVestigiality, biologically speaking, refers to organisms retaining organs, which have seemingly lost the entirety of the original function. The issue is controversial and not without dispute; nonetheless, vestigial organs are common, evolutionary knowledge. In addition, the term \"vestigiality\" is useful in referring to many genetically determined features, either morphological, behavioral, or physiological; in any such context however, it need not follow that a vestigial feature must be completely useless. A classic example at the level of gross anatomy is the human vermiform appendix — though vestigial in the sense of retaining no significant \"digestive\" function, the appendix still has immunological roles and is useful in maintaining gut flora.\n\nSimilar concepts apply at the molecular level — some nucleic acid sequences in eukaryotic genomes have no known biological function; some of them may be \"junk DNA\", but it is a difficult matter to demonstrate that a particular sequence in a particular region of a given genome is truly nonfunctional. The simple fact that it is noncoding DNA does not establish that it is functionless. Furthermore, even if an extant DNA sequence is functionless, it does not follow that it has descended from an ancestral sequence of functional DNA. Logically such DNA would not be vestigial in the sense of being the vestige of a functional structure. In contrast pseudogenes have lost their protein-coding ability or are otherwise no longer expressed in the cell. Whether they have any extant function or not, they have lost their former function and in that sense they do fit the definition of vestigiality.\n\nVestigial structures are often called \"vestigial organs\", although many of them are not actually organs. Such vestigial structures typically are degenerate, atrophied, or rudimentary, and tend to be much more variable than homologous non-vestigial parts. Although structures commonly regarded \"vestigial\" may have lost some or all of the functional roles that they had played in ancestral organisms, such structures may retain lesser functions or may have become adapted to new roles in extant populations.\n\nIt is important to avoid confusion of the concept of vestigiality with that of exaptation. Both may occur together in the same example, depending on the relevant point of view. In exaptation a structure originally used for one purpose is modified for a new one. For example, the wings of penguins would be exaptational in the sense of serving a substantial new purpose (underwater locomotion), but might still be regarded as vestigial in the sense of having lost the function of flight. In contrast Darwin argued that the wings of emus would be definitely vestigial, as they appear to have no major extant function; however, function is a matter of degree, so judgements on what is a \"major\" function are arbitrary; the emu does seem to use its wings as organs of balance in running. Similarly, the ostrich uses its wings in displays and temperature control, though they are undoubtedly vestigial as structures for flight.\n\nVestigial characters range from detrimental through neutral to favorable in terms of selection. Some may be of some limited utility to an organism but still degenerate over time if they do not confer a significant enough advantage in terms of fitness to avoid the effects of genetic drift or competing selective pressures. Vestigiality in its various forms presents many examples of evidence for biological evolution.\n\nVestigial structures have been noticed since ancient times, and the reason for their existence was long speculated upon before Darwinian evolution provided a widely accepted explanation. In the 4th century BC, Aristotle was one of the earliest writers to comment, in his \"History of Animals\", on the vestigial eyes of moles, calling them \"stunted in development\" due to the fact that moles can scarcely see. However, only in recent centuries have anatomical vestiges become a subject of serious study. In 1798, Étienne Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire noted on vestigial structures:\n\nHis colleague, Jean-Baptiste Lamarck, named a number of vestigial structures in his 1809 book \"Philosophie Zoologique\". Lamarck noted \"Olivier's \"Spalax\", which lives underground like the mole, and is apparently exposed to daylight even less than the mole, has altogether lost the use of sight: so that it shows nothing more than vestiges of this organ.\"\n\nCharles Darwin was familiar with the concept of vestigial structures, though the term for them did not yet exist. He listed a number of them in \"The Descent of Man\", including the muscles of the ear, wisdom teeth, the appendix, the tail bone, body hair, and the semilunar fold in the corner of the eye. Darwin also noted, in \"On the Origin of Species\", that a vestigial structure could be useless for its primary function, but still retain secondary anatomical roles: \"An organ serving for two purposes, may become rudimentary or utterly aborted for one, even the more important purpose, and remain perfectly efficient for the other... [A]n organ may become rudimentary for its proper purpose, and be used for a distinct object.\"\n\nIn the first edition of \"On the Origin of Species\", Darwin briefly mentioned inheritance of acquired characters under the heading \"\"Effects of Use and Disuse\"\", expressing little doubt that use \"strengthens and enlarges certain parts, and disuse diminishes them; and that such modifications are inherited\". In later editions he expanded his thoughts on this, and in the final chapter of the 6th edition concluded that species have been modified \"chiefly through the natural selection of numerous successive, slight, favourable variations; aided in an important manner by the inherited effects of the use and disuse of parts\".\n\nIn 1893, Robert Wiedersheim published \"The Structure of Man\", a book on human anatomy and its relevance to man's evolutionary history. \"The Structure of Man\" contained a list of 86 human organs that Wiedersheim described as, \"Organs having become wholly or in part functionless, some appearing in the Embryo alone, others present during Life constantly or inconstantly. For the greater part Organs which may be rightly termed Vestigial.\" Since his time, the function of some of these structures has been discovered, while other anatomical vestiges have been unearthed, making the list primarily of interest as a record of the knowledge of human anatomy at the time. Later versions of Wiedersheim's list were expanded to as many as 180 human \"vestigial organs\". This is why the zoologist Horatio Newman said in a written statement read into evidence in the Scopes Trial that \"There are, according to Wiedersheim, no less than 180 vestigial structures in the human body, sufficient to make of a man a veritable walking museum of antiquities.\"\n\nVestigial structures are often homologous to structures that are functioning normally in other species. Therefore, vestigial structures can be considered evidence for evolution, the process by which beneficial heritable traits arise in populations over an extended period of time. The existence of vestigial traits can be attributed to changes in the environment and behavior patterns of the organism in question. Through examination of these various traits, it is clear that evolution had a hard role in the development of organisms. Every anatomical structure or behavior response has origins in which they were, at one time, useful. As time progressed, the ancient common ancestor organisms did as well. Evolving with time, natural selection played a huge role. More advantageous structures were selected, while others were not. With this expansion, some traits were left to the wayside. As the function of the trait is no longer beneficial for survival, the likelihood that future offspring will inherit the \"normal\" form of it decreases. In some cases the structure becomes detrimental to the organism (for example the eyes of a mole can become infected). In many cases the structure is of no direct harm, yet all structures require extra energy in terms of development, maintenance, and weight, and are also a risk in terms of disease (e.g., infection, cancer), providing some selective pressure for the removal of parts that do not contribute to an organism's fitness. A structure that is not harmful will take longer to be 'phased out' than one that is. However, some vestigial structures may persist due to limitations in development, such that complete loss of the structure could not occur without major alterations of the organism's developmental pattern, and such alterations would likely produce numerous negative side-effects. The toes of many animals such as horses, which stand on a single toe, are still evident in a vestigial form and may become evident, although rarely, from time to time in individuals.\n\nThe vestigial versions of the structure can be compared to the original version of the structure in other species in order to determine the homology of a vestigial structure. Homologous structures indicate common ancestry with those organisms that have a functional version of the structure. Douglas Futuyma has stated that vestigial structures make no sense without evolution, just as spelling and usage of many modern English words can only be explained by their Latin or Old Norse antecedents.\n\nVestigial traits can still be considered adaptations. This is because an adaptation is often defined as a trait that has been favored by natural selection. Adaptations, therefore, need not be \"adaptive\", as long as they were at some point.\n\nVestigial characters are present throughout the animal kingdom, and an almost endless list could be given. Darwin said that \"it would be impossible to name one of the higher animals in which some part or other is not in a rudimentary condition.\"\n\nThe wings of ostriches, emus, and other flightless birds are vestigial; they are remnants of their flying ancestors' wings. The eyes of certain cavefish and salamanders are vestigial, as they no longer allow the organism to see, and are remnants of their ancestors' functional eyes. Animals that reproduce without sex (via asexual reproduction) generally lose their sexual traits, such as the ability to locate/recognize the opposite sex and copulation behavior.\n\nBoas and pythons have vestigial pelvis remnants, which are externally visible as two small pelvic spurs on each side of the cloaca. These spurs are sometimes used in copulation, but are not essential, as no colubroid snake (the vast majority of species) possesses these remnants. Furthermore, in most snakes the left lung is greatly reduced or absent. Amphisbaenians, which independently evolved limblessness, also retain vestiges of the pelvis as well as the pectoral girdle, and have lost their right lung.\n\nA case of vestigial organs was described in polyopisthocotylean Monogeneans (parasitic flatworms). These parasites usually have a posterior attachment organ with several clamps, which are sclerotised organs attaching the worm to the gill of the host fish. These clamps are extremely important for the survival of the parasite. In the family Protomicrocotylidae, species have either normal clamps, simplified clamps, or no clamps at all (in the genus \"Lethacotyle\"). After a comparative study of the relative surface of clamps in more than 100 Monogeneans, this has been interpreted as an evolutionary sequence leading to the loss of clamps. Coincidentally, other attachment structures (lateral flaps, transverse striations) have evolved in protomicrocotylids. Therefore, clamps in protomicrocotylids were considered vestigial organs.\n\nIn the foregoing examples the vestigiality is generally the (sometimes incidental) result of adaptive evolution. However, there are many examples of vestigiality as the product of drastic mutation, and such vestigiality is usually harmful or counter-adaptive. One of the earliest documented examples was that of vestigial wings in \"Drosophila\". Many examples in many other contexts have emerged since.\n\nHuman vestigiality is related to human evolution, and includes a variety of characters occurring in the human species. Many examples of these are vestigial in other primates and related animals, whereas other examples are still highly developed. The human caecum is vestigial, as often is the case in omnivores, being reduced to a single chamber receiving the content of the ileum into the colon. The ancestral caecum would have been a large, blind diverticulum in which resistant plant material such as cellulose would have been fermented in preparation for absorption in the colon. Analogous organs in other animals similar to humans continue to perform similar functions. An alternative explanation would be the possibility that natural selection selects for larger appendices because smaller and thinner appendices would be more susceptible to inflammation and disease. The coccyx, or tailbone, though a vestige of the tail of some primate ancestors, is functional as an anchor for certain pelvic muscles including: the levator ani muscle and the largest gluteal muscle, the gluteus maximus.\n\nOther structures that are vestigial include the plica semilunaris on the inside corner of the eye (a remnant of the nictitating membrane); and, as pictured, muscles in the ear and other parts of the body. Other organic structures (such as the occipitofrontalis muscle) have lost their original functions (keep the head from falling) but are still useful for other purposes (facial expression).\n\nHumans also bear some vestigial behaviors and reflexes. The formation of goose bumps in humans under stress is a vestigial reflex; its function in human ancestors was to raise the body's hair, making the ancestor appear larger and scaring off predators. The arrector pili muscle, which is a band of smooth muscle that connects the hair follicle to connective tissue, contracts and creates the goose bumps on skin.\n\nThere are also vestigial molecular structures in humans, which are no longer in use but may indicate common ancestry with other species. One example of this is a gene that is functional in most other mammals and which produces L-gulonolactone oxidase, an enzyme that can make vitamin C. A documented mutation deactivated the gene in an ancestor of the modern infraorder of monkeys and apes, and it now remains in their genomes, including the human genome, as a vestigial sequence called a pseudogene. \n\nThe shift in human diet towards soft and processed food over time caused a reduction in the number of powerful grinding teeth, especially the third molars or wisdom teeth, which were highly prone to impaction.\n\nPlants also have vestigial parts, including functionless stipules and carpels, leaf reduction of Equisetum, paraphyses of Fungi. Well known examples are the reductions in floral display, leading to smaller and/or paler flowers, in plants that reproduce without outcrossing, for example via selfing or obligate clonal reproduction.\n\n\n", "id": "308981", "title": "Vestigiality"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7043632", "text": "Vestigial response\n\nA vestigial response or vestigial reflex in a species is a response that has lost its original function. In humans, vestigial responses include ear perking, goose bumps and the hypnic jerk.\n\nIt has been observed that some people have slight protrusions on the outer ear, also known as the auricle. These protrusions tend towards the top of the auricle. This has been tagged and coined Darwin's tubercle of the auricle. This phenomenon jibes with the accepted scientific explanation: the incidence of tubercles of the auricle among humans, are vestigial structures testifying to our evolutionary past. They are a throwback to the pointed ears of many mammals and just one more vestigial trace of man's evolutionary history.\n\nThe focus on this part of the human anatomy has finally been followed by a much later observation testifying to our evolutionary past. The subsequent observation concerns an automatic ear-perking response seen, for example, in dogs when startled by a sudden noise. This response, though faint, fleeting and hardly discernible in humans nonetheless clearly manifests itself. This phenomenon is an automatic-response mechanism that activates even before a human becomes consciously aware that a startling, unexpected or unknown sound has been \"heard\".\n\nThat this vestigial response occurs even before becoming consciously aware of a startling noise would explain why the function of ear-perking had evolved in animals. The mechanism serves to give a split-second advantage to a startled animal – possibly an animal being stalked and hunted. The evolutionary advantage of the ear-perking response could spell the difference between life and death. The perking response serves to gather and focus that much more audible information that is fed into the brain and on its way to being analyzed even before the animal actually becomes aware of the sound. This fraction-of-a-second advantage would explain the evolutionary selection for this response.\n\nThe pilomotor reflex, more commonly known as goose bumps, was originally a reflex that assured the raising of fur for additional insulation against cold. When scared, this response also made the frightened animal seem bigger and a more formidable enemy.\n\nThe sudden startled arm-jerking response sometimes experienced when on the verge of sleeping is known as the hypnic jerk.\n\nThe evolutionary explanation for the existence of the hypnic jerk is unclear, but a possibility is that it is a vestigial reflex humans evolved when they usually slept in trees. Experiencing a hypnic jerk prior to falling asleep may have been selected so that the individual would be able to readjust their sleeping position in the tree with a branch-grabbing response to avoid falling, much as orangutans grasp upper branches of trees while sleeping.\n", "id": "7043632", "title": "Vestigial response"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5284506", "text": "Variome\n\nThe variome is the whole set of genetic variations found in populations of species that have gone through a relatively short evolution change. For example, among humans, about 1 in every 1,200 nucleotide bases differ. However, as the human species diverged only 10,000 years ago, this variation rate is comparatively small. In practice, the variome can be the sum of the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the population. The Human Variome Project seeks to compile this genetic variation data worldwide. Variomics is the study of variome and a branch of bioinformatics.\n\nThe blend word 'variome' is from genetic variant (“a version of a gene that differs from other versions of the same gene which may or may not have an effect on human health”) and the suffix –ome (“the complete whole of a class of substances for a species or an individual”). ‘Variomics’ (which appeared in the literature before ‘variome’) was first coined by Professor Richard ‘Dick’ Cotton in 2002 to describe (“The systematic study of the effect of genetic variation on human health”). ‘Variome’ has since been most commonly used in reference to the ‘Human Variome Project’ founded four years in 2006 after ‘variomics’ was first coined.\n\nThere are a number of international project studying the human variome, including the International HapMap Project and the Human Variome Project (HVP). The HapMap Project aims to identify and catalog genetic similarities and differences among humans. The HVP aims to collect data on all human genetic variation.\n\n\n\n", "id": "5284506", "title": "Variome"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=980365", "text": "Ring species\n\nIn biology, a ring species is a connected series of neighbouring populations, each of which can interbreed with closely sited related populations, but for which there exist at least two \"end\" populations in the series, which are too distantly related to interbreed, though there is a potential gene flow between each \"linked\" population. Such non-breeding, though genetically connected, \"end\" populations may co-exist in the same region thus closing a \"ring\". The German term Rassenkreis, meaning a ring of populations, is also used.\n\nRing species have been cited as evidence of evolution in that they illustrate what happens over time as populations genetically diverge, specifically because they represent, in living populations, what normally happens over time between long deceased ancestor populations and living populations, in which the intermediates have become extinct. Richard Dawkins says that ring species \"are only showing us in the spatial dimension something that must always happen in the time dimension\".\n\nFormally, the issue is that \"interfertility\" (ability to interbreed) is not a transitive relation – if A can breed with B, and B can breed with C, it does not follow that A can breed with C – and thus does not define an equivalence relation. A ring species is a species with a counterexample to the transitivity of interbreeding. However, it is unclear whether any of the examples of ring species cited by scientists actually permit gene flow from end to end.\n\nRing species also present an interesting case of the species problem for those seeking to divide the living world into discrete species. All that distinguishes a ring species from two separate species is the existence of the connecting populations; if enough of the connecting populations within the ring perish to sever the breeding connection then the ring species' distal populations will be recognized as two distinct species.\n\nThe problem is whether to quantify the whole ring as a single species (despite the fact that not all individuals can interbreed) or to classify each population as a distinct species (despite the fact that it can interbreed with its near neighbours). Ring species illustrate that the species concept is not as clear-cut as it is often thought to be.\n\nA small number of forms of life appear to match the definition of a ring species. The classic example is that of the \"Larus\" gull, which in 1925 was found to form a chain of varieties around the Arctic Circle by Jonathan Dwight, but lately doubts have arisen as to whether this is an actual ring species. In 1938, Claud Buchanan Ticehurst hypothesized the greenish warbler spread from Nepal around the Tibetan Plateau, while adapting to each new environment, meeting again in Siberia where the ends no longer interbreed. These and other discoveries led Ernst Mayr to first formulate a theory on ring species in his 1942 study \"Systematics and the Origin of Species\". Also in the 1940s, Robert C. Stebbins recognised the \"Ensatina\" around the Californian Central Valley as a ring species; however, some authors consider this classification as incorrect. Finally in 2012, the first example of a ring species in plants was found in a spurge form around the Caribbean Sea.\n\nThe textbook examples of ring species, including the circumpolar herring gull complex, the greenish warbler of Asia, and the \"Ensatina\" salamanders of America, have all been challenged, so ring species are at best rare.\n\nA classic example of ring species was the \"Larus\" gulls' circumpolar species \"ring\". The range of these gulls forms a ring around the North Pole, which is not normally transited by individual gulls.\n\nThe European herring gull (\"L. argentatus argenteus\"), which lives primarily in Great Britain and Ireland, can hybridize with the American herring gull (\"L. smithsonianus\"), (living in North America), which can also hybridize with the Vega or East Siberian herring gull (\"L. vegae\"), the western subspecies of which, Birula's gull (\"L. vegae birulai\"), can hybridize with Heuglin's gull (\"L. heuglini\"), which in turn can hybridize with the Siberian lesser black-backed gull (\"L. fuscus\"). All four of these live across the north of Siberia. The last is the eastern representative of the lesser black-backed gulls back in north-western Europe, including Great Britain.\n\nThe lesser black-backed gulls and herring gulls are sufficiently different that they do not normally hybridize; thus the group of gulls forms a continuum except where the two lineages meet in Europe.\n\nHowever, a 2004 genetic study entitled \"The herring gull complex is not a ring species\" has shown that this example is far more complicated than presented here (Liebers et al., 2004): this example only speaks to the complex of species from the classical herring gull through lesser black-backed gull. There are several other taxonomically unclear examples that belong in the same species complex, such as yellow-legged gull (\"L. michahellis\"), glaucous gull (\"L. hyperboreus\"), and Caspian gull (\"L. cachinnans\").\n\nThe greenish warbler (\"Phylloscopus trochiloides\") forms a species ring, around the Himalayas. It is supposed to have spread from Nepal around the inhospitable Tibetan Plateau, to rejoin in Siberia, where the \"plumbeitarsus\" and the \"viridanus\" appeared to no longer mutually procreate.\n\nThe song sparrow (\"Melospiza melodia\") forms a ring around the Sierra Nevada of California with the subspecies \"heermanni\" and \"fallax\" meeting in the vicinity of the San Gorgonio Pass.\n\n\"Euphorbia tithymaloides\" is a group within the spurge family that has reproduced and evolved in a ring through Central America and the Caribbean, meeting in the Virgin Islands where they appear to be morphologically and ecologically distinct.\n\n\n", "id": "980365", "title": "Ring species"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19515374", "text": "Escalation hypothesis\n\nThe Escalation Hypothesis is a theory put forward by Geerat J. Vermeij. It states that organisms are in constant conflict with one another and therefore devote lots of resources to thwarting the adaptations evolution brings to all competing organisms as time advances. This is in contrast to adaptations evolution may bring that are unrelated to competition with other organisms such as adapting to ecological niches based upon other factors such as geology and climate. \n\nVermeij's extensive work with the characteristics of marine gastropod fossils informed his development of thoughts on escalation. One prediction of the Escalation Hypothesis is that individual species having fewer adaptations that enable them to compete with other life forms are more likely to survive a mass extinction event such as one of The Big Five. This is because there is more flexibility to fit into new ecological niches that arduous adaptations such as heavy shells or energy consuming venom production would hinder.\n\n", "id": "19515374", "title": "Escalation hypothesis"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11508558", "text": "Evolution of biological complexity\n\nThe evolution of biological complexity is one important outcome of the process of evolution. Evolution has produced some remarkably complex organisms - although the actual level of complexity is very hard to define or measure accurately in biology, with properties such as gene content, the number of cell types or morphology all being used to assess an organism's complexity.\n\nMany biologists used to believe that evolution was progressive and had a direction that led towards so-called \"higher organisms,\" despite a lack of evidence for this viewpoint. This idea of \"progression\" and \"higher organisms\" in evolution is now regarded as misleading, with natural selection having no intrinsic direction and organisms selected for either increased or decreased complexity in response to local environmental conditions. Although there has been an increase in the maximum level of complexity over the history of life, there has always been a large majority of small and simple organisms and the most common level of complexity appears to have remained relatively constant.\n\nUsually organisms that reproduce more quickly and plentifully than their competitors have an evolutionary advantage. Consequently, organisms can evolve to become simpler and thus multiply faster and produce more offspring, as they require fewer resources to reproduce. A good example are parasites such as Plasmodium - the parasite responsible for malaria - and mycoplasma; these organisms often dispense with traits that are made unnecessary through parasitism on a host.\n\nA lineage can also dispense with complexity when a particular complex trait merely provides no selective advantage in a particular environment. Loss of this trait need not necessarily confer a selective advantage, but may be lost due to the accumulation of mutations if its loss does not confer an immediate selective disadvantage. For example, a parasitic organism may dispense with the synthetic pathway of a metabolite where it can readily scavenge that metabolite from its host. Discarding this synthesis may not necessarily allow the parasite to conserve significant energy or resources and grow faster, but the loss may be fixed in the population through mutation accumulation if no disadvantage is incurred by loss of that pathway. Mutations causing loss of a complex trait occur more often than mutations causing gain of a complex trait.\n\nWith selection, evolution can also produce more complex organisms. Complexity often arises in the co-evolution of hosts and pathogens, with each side developing ever more sophisticated adaptations, such as the immune system and the many techniques pathogens have developed to evade it. For example, the parasite \"Trypanosoma brucei\", which causes sleeping sickness, has evolved so many copies of its major surface antigen that about 10% of its genome is devoted to different versions of this one gene. This tremendous complexity allows the parasite to constantly change its surface and thus evade the immune system through antigenic variation.\n\nMore generally, the growth of complexity may be driven by the co-evolution between an organism and the ecosystem of predators, prey and parasites to which it tries to stay adapted: as any of these become more complex in order to cope better with the diversity of threats offered by the ecosystem formed by the others, the others too will have to adapt by becoming more complex, thus triggering an ongoing evolutionary arms race towards more complexity. This trend may be reinforced by the fact that ecosystems themselves tend to become more complex over time, as species diversity increases, together with the linkages or dependencies between species.\n\nIf evolution possessed an active trend toward complexity (orthogenesis), as was widely believed in the 19th century, then we would expect to see an increase over time in the most common value (the mode) of complexity among organisms, as shown to the left. Indeed, some computer models have suggested that the generation of complex organisms is an inescapable feature of evolution. This is sometimes referred to as evolutionary self-organization. Self-organization is the spontaneous internal organization of a system. This process is accompanied by an increase in systemic complexity, resulting in an emergent property that is distinctly different from any of the constituent parts.\n\nHowever, the idea of increasing production of complexity in evolution can also be explained through a passive process. Assuming unbiased random changes of complexity and the existence of a minimum complexity leads to an increase over time of the average complexity of the biosphere. This involves an increase in variance, but the mode does not change. The trend towards the creation of some organisms with higher complexity over time exists, but it involves increasingly small percentages of living things.\n\nIn this hypothesis, any appearance of evolution acting with an intrinsic direction towards increasingly complex organisms is a result of people concentrating on the small number of large, complex organisms that inhabit the right-hand tail of the complexity distribution and ignoring simpler and much more common organisms. This passive model predicts that the majority of species are microscopic prokaryotes, which is supported by estimates of 10 to 10 extant prokaryotes compared to diversity estimates of 10 to 3·10 for eukaryotes. Consequently, in this view, microscopic life dominates Earth, and large organisms only appear more diverse due to sampling bias.\n\nGenome complexity has generally increased since the beginning of the life on Earth.\n\nRecently work in evolution theory has proposed that by relaxing selection pressure, which typically acts to streamline genomes, the complexity of an organism increases by a process called constructive neutral evolution. Since the effective population size in eukaryotes (especially multi-cellular organisms) is much smaller than in prokaryotes, they experience lower selection constraints.\n\nAccording to this model, new genes are created by non-adaptive processes, such as by random gene duplication. These novel entities, although not required for viability, do give the organism excess capacity that can facilitate the mutational decay of functional subunits. If this decay results in a situation where the all of the genes are now required, the organism has been trapped in a new state where the number of genes has increased. This process has been sometimes described as a complexifying ratchet. These supplemental genes can then be co-opted by natural selection by a process called neofunctionalization. In other instances constructive neutral evolution does not promote the creation of new parts, but rather promotes novel interactions between existing players, which then take on new moonlighting roles.\n\nConstructive neutral evolution has also been used to explain how ancient complexes, such as the spliceosome and the ribosome, have gained new subunits over time, how new alternative spliced isoforms of genes arise, how gene scrambling in ciliates evolved, and how pervasive pan-RNA editing may have arisen in \"Trypanosoma brucei\".\n\nIn the 19th century, some scientists such as Jean-Baptiste Lamarck (1744–1829) and Ray Lankester (1847–1929) believed that nature had an innate striving to become more complex with evolution. This belief may reflect then-current ideas of Hegel (1770–1831) and of Herbert Spencer (1820–1903) which envisaged the universe gradually evolving to a higher, more perfect state.\n\nThis view regarded the evolution of parasites from independent organisms to a parasitic species as \"devolution\" or \"degeneration\", and contrary to nature. Social theorists have sometimes interpreted this approach metaphorically to decry certain categories of people as \"degenerate parasites\". Later scientists regarded biological devolution as nonsense; rather, lineages become simpler or more complicated according to whatever forms had a selective advantage.\n\n", "id": "11508558", "title": "Evolution of biological complexity"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9527920", "text": "Evolutionary physiology\n\nEvolutionary physiology is the study of physiological evolution, which is to say, the manner in which the functional characteristics of individuals in a population of organisms have responded to selection across multiple generations during the history of the population.\n\nIt is a subdiscipline of both physiology and evolutionary biology. Practitioners in this field come from a variety of backgrounds, including physiology, evolutionary biology, ecology and genetics.\n\nAccordingly, the range of phenotypes studied by evolutionary physiologists is broad, including life history, behavior, whole-organism performance, functional morphology, biomechanics, anatomy, classical physiology, endocrinology, biochemistry, and molecular evolution. It is closely related to comparative physiology and environmental physiology, and its findings are a major concern of evolutionary medicine. One definition that has been offered is \"the study of the physiological basis of fitness, namely, correlated evolution (including constraints and trade-offs) of physiological form and function associated with the environment, diet, homeostasis, energy management, longevity, and mortality and life history characteristics\".\n\nAs the name implies, evolutionary physiology is the product of what was at one time two distinct scientific disciplines. According to Garland and Carter, evolutionary physiology arose in the late 1970s, following debates concerning the metabolic and thermoregulatory status of dinosaurs (see physiology of dinosaurs) and mammal-like reptiles.\n\nThis period was followed by attempts in the early 1980s to integrate quantitative genetics into evolutionary biology, which had spill-over effects on other fields, such as behavioral ecology and ecophysiology. In the mid- to late-1980s, phylogenetic comparative methods started to become popular in many fields, including physiological ecology and comparative physiology. A 1987 volume titled \"New Directions in Ecological Physiology\" had little ecology but a considerable emphasis on evolutionary topics. It generated vigorous debate, and within a few years the National Science Foundation had developed a panel titled Ecological and Evolutionary Physiology.\n\nShortly thereafter, selection experiments and experimental evolution became increasingly common in evolutionary physiology. Macrophysiology has emerged as a subdiscipline, in which practitioners attempt to identify large-scale patterns in physiological traits (e.g., patterns of covariation with latitude) and their ecological implications. \n\nMore recently, the importance of a merger of evolutionary biology and physiology has been argued from the perspective of functional analyses, epigenetics, and an extended evolutionary synthesis. The growth of evolutionary physiology is also reflected by the emergence of subdisciplines, such as evolutionary endocrinology, which addresses such hybrid questions as \"What are the most common endocrine mechanisms that respond to selection on behavior or life-history traits?\"\n\nAs a hybrid scientific discipline, evolutionary physiology provides some unique perspectives. For example, an understanding of physiological mechanisms can help in determining whether a particular pattern of phenotypic variation or covariation (such as an allometric relationship) represents what could possibly exist or just what selection has allowed. Similarly, a thorough knowledge of physiological mechanisms can greatly enhance understanding of possible reasons for evolutionary correlations and constraints than is possible for many of the traits typically studied by evolutionary biologists (such as morphology).\n\nImportant areas of current research include:\n\n\nIn the United States, research in evolutionary physiology is funded mainly by the National Science Foundation. A number of scientific societies feature sections that encompass evolutionary physiology, including:\n\n\n\n", "id": "9527920", "title": "Evolutionary physiology"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5644238", "text": "Female Sabotage\n\nFemale sabotage is an evolutionary theory regarding the propensity of certain females to select \"burdened\" males of their species for mating.\n\nSoon after Charles Darwin published his theory of Natural Selection, he was faced with a puzzle. If natural selection suggests \"survival of the fittest,\" then why do some males have traits that detract from their survival? For instance, the peacock grows a colorful, cumbersome tail that not only attracts predators, but makes it difficult for him to escape those predators. Similarly, the buck grows enormous antlers which are heavy to carry and can easily become tangled in branches, interfering with effective escape from pursuing hunters.\n\nOf course, Darwin knew that there was more to natural selection than simple fitness. An equally important part of the struggle of life regards reproduction. In this case, the question becomes, \"Why would a female burden her offspring with dangerous traits by mating with a similarly burdened male?\"\n\nNoting that the males with burdensome traits are almost entirely those in polygamous species, where a minority of males generally mate with many females, Darwin had an insight. He realized that if females found these male burdens more \"attractive,\" and if that attractiveness resulted in more matings by burdened males, then the increase in matings of a few sons might offset the death of many other sons as a result of the burden. In effect, if the success of the surviving males produced enough offspring to cover more than the loss of potential offspring from their lost brothers, then the female who mated with a burdened male had chosen correctly.\n\nIn 1996, however, Joe Abraham presented a re-interpretation of the problem. In polygamous species, males generally contribute nothing to the nurturing of offspring, but nevertheless continue to consume finite resources. In such situations, males effectively become competitors with females and young once they are finished mating. This gives females a reason to sabotage males, and mating gives them an opportunity to do so. By choosing to mate exclusively with males who are unlikely to survive because of their burdens, the females ensure that as the males die, more food and other resources will remain for females and their young. Because females are the limiting resource in most species, as their numbers increase, population fitness will also increase.\n\nJust as a given amount of land can only produce a finite amount of grazing, and a limited amount of grazing can only support a limited number of grazing animals, so a given number of grazing animals can only sustain a limited number of predators. Similar limitations apply to all living things, and are known as the carrying capacity of a physical area. If males' burdens are more likely to draw the interest of local predators, then such males effectively shift predation away from females and their young. In this case, the females and young will gain an added benefit from decreased predation, and enjoy even higher rates of survivability.\n\nAbraham's explanation reunites the major split in sexual selection—intrasexual selection (male combat) and intersexual selection (female choice)--together under one rubric. Under female sabotage, the increase in resources becomes the critical factor, and the cause of increased male mortality is secondary. The theory also offers new, feminist approaches to leks, harems, resource guarding and mate location.\n\nPerhaps the most attractive aspect of Abraham's explanation, however, is that it can easily work with any of the many current theories of sexual selection, and must play some role in them. An increase in resources and a decrease in predation for females and their young is an inevitable result of increased male mortality, regardless of what mechanism drives females to mate with males carrying burdensome traits.\n\nAbraham, J.N. 1998. \"La Saboteuse: An Ecological Theory of Sexual Dimorphism in Animals.\" \"Acta Biotheoretica\" 46:23-35. \n", "id": "5644238", "title": "Female Sabotage"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13244658", "text": "Flying primate hypothesis\n\nIn evolutionary biology, the flying primate hypothesis posits that megabats, a subgroup of Chiroptera (also known as flying foxes), form an evolutionary sister group of primates. The hypothesis began with Carl Linnaeus in 1758, and was again advanced by J.D. Smith in 1980. It was proposed in its modern form by Australian neuroscientist Jack Pettigrew in 1986 after he discovered that the connections between the retina and the superior colliculus (a region of the midbrain) in the megabat \"Pteropus\" were organized in the same way found in primates, and different from all other mammals. This was followed up by a longer study published in 1989, in which this was supported by the analysis of many other brain and body characteristics. Pettigrew suggested that flying foxes, colugos, and primates were all descendants of the same group of early arboreal mammals. The megabat flight and the colugo gliding could be both seen as locomotory adaptations to a life high above the ground.\n\nThe flying primate hypothesis met resistance from many zoologists. Its biggest challenges were not centered on the argument that megabats and primates are evolutionarily related, which reflects earlier ideas (such as the grouping of primates, tree shrews, colugos, and bats under the same taxonomic group, the Superorder Archonta). Rather, many biologists resisted the implication that megabats and microbats (or echolocating bats) formed distinct branches of mammalian evolution, with flight having evolved twice. This implication was borne out of the fact that microbats do not resemble primates in any of the neural characteristics studied by Pettigrew, instead resembling primitive mammals such as Insectivora in these respects. The advanced brain characters demonstrated in \"Pteropus\" could not, therefore, be generalized to imply that all bats are similar to primates.\n\nMore recently, the flying primate hypothesis was rejected when scientists compared the DNA of bats to that of primates. These genetic studies support the monophyly of bats.\n\nSoon after Pettigrew's study, work on another genus of megabat (\"Rousettus\") disputed the existence of an advanced pattern of connections between the retina and the superior colliculus. However, this conclusion was later criticised on methodological grounds. Later studies have sought further evidence of unique characteristics linking the megabat and primate brains. These studies have had limited success in identifying unique links between megabats and present-day primates, instead concluding that the megabat brain has characteristics that may resemble those likely to have existed in primitive primate brains. Nonetheless, modern neuroanatomical studies have repeatedly supported the existence of very significant differences between the brains of megabats and microbats, which is one of the anchors of the \"flying primate\" hypothesis.\n\nThe implication that bats are diphyletic has been fiercely disputed by many zoologists, not only based on the unlikelihood that wings would have evolved twice in mammals, but also on biochemical studies of molecular evolution, which indicate that bats are monophyletic. However, other studies have disputed the validity of these conclusions. In particular, it has been argued that phylogenies based solely on DNA data can be subject to an artifact named the \"base-compositional bias\" Further studies did not find base-compositional bias sufficient to discount support for the monophyly of bats.\n\n", "id": "13244658", "title": "Flying primate hypothesis"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23107187", "text": "Genetic memory (biology)\n\nIn biology, memory is present if the state of a biological system depends on its history in addition to present conditions. If this memory is recorded in the genetic material and stably inherited through cell division (mitosis or meiosis), it is genetic memory.\n\n\"Somatic memory\" is limited to the organism and not passed on to subsequent generations. However, its mechanism may involve mitotically stable genetic memory. The term applies for cellular memory, animals' memory, and plants' memory, as described in the following paragraphs.\n\nAll cells in multicellular organisms are derived from a pluripotent zygote and contain the same genetic material (with a few exceptions). However, they are capable of recording a history of their development within the organism leading to their specialized functions and limitations. Cells often employ epigenetic processes that affect DNA-protein interactions to record this \"cellular memory\" in the form of mitotically stable changes of the genetic material without a change in the DNA sequence itself. This is typically achieved via changes of the chromatin structure. Examples are methylation patterns of the DNA molecule itself and proteins involved in packaging DNA, such as histones (also referred to as \"histone code\").\n\nA case of somatic genetic memory is the \"immunological memory\" of the adaptive immune response in vertebrates. The immune system is capable of learning to recognize pathogens and keeping a memory of this learning process, which is the basis of the success of vaccinations. Antibody genes in B and T lymphocytes are assembled from separate gene segments, giving each lymphocyte a unique antibody coding sequence leading to the vast diversity of antibodies in the immune system. If stimulated by an antigen (e.g. following vaccination or an infection with a pathogen), these antibodies are further fine-tuned via hypermutation. Memory B cells capable of producing these antibodies form the basis for acquired immunological memory. Each individual therefore carries a unique genetic memory of its immune system's close encounters with pathogens. As a somatic memory, this is not passed on to the next generation.\n\nPlants that undergo vernalization (promotion of flowering by a prolonged exposure to cold temperatures) record a \"genetic memory of winter\" to gain the competence to flower. The process involves epigenetically recording the length of cold exposure through chromatin remodeling which leads to mitotically stable changes in gene expression (the \"winter code\"). This releases the inhibition of flowering initiation and allows the plants to bloom with the correct timing at the onset of spring. As a somatic memory, this state is not passed on to subsequent generations but has to be acquired by each individual plant. The process of vernalization was falsely assumed to be a stably inherited genetic memory passed on to subsequent generations by the Russian geneticist Trofim Lysenko. Lysenko's claims of genetic memory and efforts to obtain or fabricate results in proof of it had disastrous effects for Russian genetics in the early 20th century (also see: Lysenkoism).\n\nIn genetics, genomic imprinting or other patterns of inheritance that are not determined by DNA sequence alone can form an epigenetic memory that is passed on to subsequent generations through meiosis. In contrast, somatic genetic memories are passed on by mitosis and limited to the individual, but are not passed on to the offspring. Both processes include similar epigenetic mechanisms, e.g. involving histones and methylation patterns.\n\nIn microbes, genetic memory is present in the form of inversion of specific DNA sequences serving as a switch between alternative patterns of gene expression.\n\nIn population genetics and evolution, genetic memory represents the recorded history of adaptive changes in a species. Selection of organisms carrying genes coding for the best adapted proteins results in the evolution of species. An example for such a genetic memory is the innate immune response that represents a recording of the history of common microbial and viral pathogens encountered throughout the evolutionary history of the species. In contrast to the somatic memory of the adaptive immune response, the innate immune response is present at birth and does not require the immune system to learn to recognize antigens.\n\nIn the history of theories of evolution, the proposed genetic memory of an individual's experiences and environmental influences was a central part of Lamarckism to explain the inheritance of evolutionary changes.\n\nIn ethology, genetic memory refers the inheritance of instinct in animals and humans.\n", "id": "23107187", "title": "Genetic memory (biology)"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1528572", "text": "Interactor\n\nAn interactor is an entity that natural selection acts upon.\n\nInteractor is a concept commonly used in the field of evolutionary biology. A widely accepted theory of evolution is the theory from Charles Darwin. He states, in short, that in a population there is often variation in heritable traits among individuals, in which a form of the trait might be more beneficial than the other form(s). Due to this difference the change of getting more adjusted offspring to the environment is higher. The process describing the selection of the environment on the traits of organisms is called natural selection. Based on this idea natural selection seems to act on traits of individuals, which evolutionary biologist like to call the interactor. So stated in a different way; an interactor is defined as a part of an organism that natural selection acts upon. \n\nOther terms that are often mentioned in the same context as interactors, are replicators and vehicles. When replicators are mentioned, they mean things that pass on their entire structure through successive replications, like genes. This is not the same as an interactor, as interactors are things that interact with their environment and natural selection can act upon. Due to this interaction with the environment, interactors cause differential replication. However, some things (for example genes) can be both replicators and interactors. \n\nVehicles are often used as a synonym of interactors, only in a way that vehicles can \"drive\" natural selection, as if they have the behaviour to steer natural selection in a specific way. The term \"vehicle\" makes it look that way and therefore some people (like Hull) prefer the word \"interactor\" to \"vehicle\" for the same concept. An example of an interactor is the shell colour of snails (see below).\n\nA study on common garden snails was performed and showed how natural selection on an interactor works. This species is highly suitable for evolutionary research due to their easily to score phenotype and their very straightforward genotype causing the phenotypic variation. Phenotypic variation among common garden snails can be found in their shell colour and banding and both colouring and banding is regulated by one single gene. The snail shells have variations in colours namely brown, pink and yellow; with brown being more dominant than pink and yellow. Furthermore, banding variation can be described as unbanded and banded, with banded individuals differing from another by the number of bands. One of the conclusions that could be drawn out of this research is that in grasslands, yellow individuals had a higher survival rate and were more abundant in these grasslands. This means that natural selection acted on the shell colour, which means that shell colour is the interactor in this example. Furthermore, they found that the brown individuals were more abundant and had a higher survival rate in woodlands than the yellow individuals. Moreover, a specific form of natural selection called thermal selection showed that shell colour worked in the interaction with the environment by yellow shells being more abundant, so more adjusted to reflect heat, in warmer places.\n\n\"Science and Selection\", David Hull, 2001 (http://assets.cambridge.org/97805216/43399/sample/9780521643399ws.pdf)\n\n\"Replication and Reproduction\", David Hull, 2001 (https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/replication/)\n\nColor polymorphism in a land snail Cepaea nemoralis (Pulmonata: Helicidae) as viewed by potential avian predators, Adrian Surmacki & Agata Ożarowska-Nowicka & Zuzanna M. Rosin, 2013 (https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/s00114-013-1049-y.pdf) \n\n\"On the Origin of Species,\" Charles Darwin, 1859 \n\n", "id": "1528572", "title": "Interactor"}
{"url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=343457", "text": "Maternal effect\n\nA maternal effect is a situation where the phenotype of an organism is determined not only by the environment it experiences and its genotype, but also by the environment and genotype of its mother. In genetics, maternal effects occur when an organism shows the phenotype expected from the genotype of the mother, irrespective of its own genotype, often due to the mother supplying messenger RNA or proteins to the egg. Maternal effects can also be caused by the maternal environment independent of genotype, sometimes controlling the size, sex, or behaviour of the offspring. These adaptive maternal effects lead to phenotypes of offspring that increase their fitness. Further, it introduces the concept of phenotypic plasticity, an important evolutionary concept. It has been proposed that maternal effects are important for the evolution of adaptive responses to environmental heterogeneity.\n\nIn genetics, a maternal effect occurs when the phenotype of an organism is determined by the genotype of its mother. For example, if a mutation is maternal effect recessive, then a female homozygous for the mutation may appear phenotypically normal, however her offspring will show the mutant phenotype, even if they are heterozygous for the mutation.\n\nMaternal effects often occur because the mother supplies a particular mRNA or protein to the oocyte, hence the maternal genome determines whether the molecule is functional. Maternal supply of mRNAs to the early embryo is important, as in many organisms the embryo is initially transcriptionally inactive. Because of the inheritance pattern of maternal effect mutations, special genetic screens are required to identify them. These typically involve examining the phenotype of the organisms one generation later than in a conventional (zygotic) screen, as their mothers will be potentially homozygous for maternal effect mutations that arise.\n\nA \"Drosophila melanogaster\" oocyte develops in an egg chamber in close association with a set of cells called nurse cells. Both the oocyte and the nurse cells are descended from a single germline stem cell, however cytokinesis is incomplete in these cell divisions, and the cytoplasm of the nurse cells and the oocyte is connected by structures known as ring canals. Only the oocyte undergoes meiosis and contributes DNA to the next generation.\n\nMany maternal effect \"Drosophila\" mutants have been found that affect the early steps in embryogenesis such as axis determination, including \"bicoid, dorsal, gurken\" and \"oskar\". For example, embryos from homozygous \"bicoid\" mothers fail to produce head and thorax structures.\n\nOnce the gene that is disrupted in the \"bicoid\" mutant was identified, it was shown that \"bicoid\" mRNA is transcribed in the nurse cells and then relocalized to the oocyte. Other maternal effect mutants either affect products that are similarly produced in the nurse cells and act in the oocyte, or parts of the transportation machinery that are required for this relocalization. Since these genes are expressed in the (maternal) nurse cells and not in the oocyte or fertilised embryo, the maternal genotype determines whether they can function.\n\nIn birds, mothers may pass down hormones in their eggs that affect an offspring's growth and behavior. Experiments in domestic canaries have shown that eggs that contain more yolk androgens develop into chicks that display more social dominance. Similar variation in yolk androgen levels has been seen in bird species like the American coot, though the mechanism of effect has yet to be established.\n\nIn 2015, obesity theorist Edward Archer published \"The Childhood Obesity Epidemic as a Result of Nongenetic Evolution: The Maternal Resources Hypothesis\" and a series of works on maternal effects in human obesity and health. In this body of work, Archer argued that accumulative maternal effects via the non-genetic evolution of matrilineal nutrient metabolism is responsible for the increased global prevalence of obesity and diabetes mellitus type 2. Archer posited that decrements in maternal metabolic control altered fetal pancreatic beta cell, adipocyte (fat cell) and myocyte (muscle cell) development thereby inducing an enduring competitive advantage of adipocytes in the acquisition and sequestering on nutrient energy.\n\nThe environment or condition of the mother can also in some situations influence the phenotype of her offspring, independent of the offspring's genotype.\n\nIn contrast, a paternal effect is when a phenotype results from the genotype of the father, rather than the genotype of the individual. The genes responsible for these effects are components of sperm that are involved in fertilization and early development. An example of a paternal-effect gene is the ms(3)sneaky in \"Drosophila\". Males with a mutant allele of this gene produce sperm that are able to fertilize an egg, but the sneaky-inseminated eggs do not develop normally. However, females with this mutation produce eggs that undergo normal development when fertilized.\n\nAdaptive maternal effects induce phenotypic changes in offspring that result in an increase in fitness. These changes arise from mothers sensing environmental cues that work to reduce offspring fitness, and then responding to them in a way that then “prepares” offspring for their future environments. A key characteristic of “adaptive maternal effects” phenotypes is their plasticity. Phenotypic plasticity gives organisms the ability to respond to different environments by altering their phenotype. With these “altered” phenotypes increasing fitness it becomes important to look at the likelihood that adaptive maternal effects will evolve and become a significant phenotypic adaptation to an environment.\n\nWhen traits are influenced by either the maternal environment or the maternal phenotype, it is said to be influenced by maternal effects. Maternal effects work to alter the phenotypes of the offspring through pathways other than DNA. \"Adaptive\" maternal effects are when these maternal influences lead to a phenotypic change that increases the fitness of the offspring. In general, adaptive maternal effects are a mechanism to cope with factors that work to reduce offspring fitness; they are also environment specific.\n\nIt can sometimes be difficult to differentiate between maternal and adaptive maternal effects. Consider the following: Gypsy moths reared on foliage of black oak, rather than chestnut oak, had offspring that developed faster. This is a maternal, \"not\" an adaptive maternal effect. In order to be an adaptive maternal effect, the mother’s environment would have to have led to a change in the eating habits or behavior of the offspring. The key difference between the two therefore, is that adaptive maternal effects are environment specific. The phenotypes that arise are in response to the mother sensing an environment that would reduce the fitness of her offspring. By accounting for this environment she is then able to alter the phenotypes to actually increase the offspring’s fitness. \"Maternal\" effects are not in response to an environmental cue, and further they have the potential to increase offspring fitness, but they may not.\n\nWhen looking at the likelihood of these “altered” phenotypes evolving there are many factors and cues involved. Adaptive maternal effects evolve only when offspring can face many potential environments; when a mother can “predict” the environment into which her offspring will be born; and when a mother can influence her offspring’s phenotype, thereby increasing their fitness. The summation of all of these factors can then lead to these “altered” traits becoming favorable for evolution.\n\nThe phenotypic changes that arise from adaptive maternal effects are a result of the mother sensing that a certain aspect of the environment may decrease the survival of her offspring. When sensing a cue the mother “relays” information to the developing offspring and therefore induces adaptive maternal effects. This tends to then cause the offspring to have a higher fitness because they are “prepared” for the environment they are likely to experience. These cues can include responses to predators, habitat, high population density, and food availability\nThe increase in size of Northern American red squirrels is a great example of an adaptive maternal effect producing a phenotype that resulted in an increased fitness. The adaptive maternal effect was induced by the mothers sensing the high population density and correlating it to low food availability per individual. Her offspring were on average larger than other squirrels of the same species; they also grew faster. Ultimately, the squirrels born during this period of high population density showed an increased survival rate (and therefore fitness) during their first winter.\n\nWhen analyzing the types of changes that can occur to a phenotype, we can see changes that are behavioral, morphological, or physiological. A characteristic of the phenotype that arises through adaptive maternal effects, is the plasticity of this phenotype. Phenotypic plasticity allows organisms to adjust their phenotype to various environments, thereby enhancing their fitness to changing environmental conditions. Ultimately it is a key attribute to an organism’s, and a population’s, ability to adapt to short term environmental change.\n\nPhenotypic plasticity can be seen in many organisms, one species that exemplifies this concept is the seed beetle \"Stator limbatus\". This seed beetle reproduces on different host plants, two of the more common ones being \"Cercidium floridum\" and \"Acacia greggii\". When \"C. floridum\" is the host plant, there is selection for a large egg size; when \"A. greggii\" is the host plant, there is a selection for a smaller egg size. In an experiment it was seen that when a beetle who usually laid eggs on \"A. greggii\" was put onto \"C. floridum\", the survivorship of the laid eggs was lower compared to those eggs produced by a beetle that was conditioned and remained on the \"C. florium\" host plant. Ultimately these experiments showed the plasticity of egg size production in the beetle, as well as the influence of the maternal environment on the survivorship of the offspring.\n\nIn many insects:\n\nRelated to adaptive maternal effects are epigenetic effects. Epigenetics is the study of long lasting changes in gene expression that are produced by modifications to chromatin instead of changes in DNA sequence, as is seen in DNA mutation. This \"change\" refers to DNA methylation, histone acetylation, or the interaction of non-coding RNAs with DNA. DNA methylation is the addition of methyl groups to the DNA. When DNA is methylated in mammals, the transcription of the gene at that location is turned down or turned off entirely. The induction of DNA methylation is highly influenced by the maternal environment. Some maternal environments can lead to a higher methylation of an offspring's DNA, while others lower methylation.[22] The fact that methylation can be influenced by the maternal environment, makes it similar to adaptive maternal effects. Further similarities are seen by the fact that methylation can often increase the fitness of the offspring. Additionally, epigenetics can refer to histone modifications or non-coding RNAs that create a sort of cellular memory. Cellular memory refers to a cell's ability to pass nongenetic information to its daughter cell during replication. For example, after differentiation, a liver cell performs different functions than a brain cell; cellular memory allows these cells to \"remember\" what functions they are supposed to perform after replication. Some of these epigenetic changes can be passed down to future generations, while others are reversible within a particular individual's lifetime. This can explain why individuals with identical DNA can differ in their susceptibility to certain chronic diseases.\n\nCurrently, researchers are examining the correlations between maternal diet during pregnancy and its effect on the offspring’s susceptibility for chronic diseases later in life. The fetal programming hypothesis highlights the idea that environmental stimuli during critical periods of fetal development can have lifelong effects on body structure and health and in a sense they prepare offspring for the environment they will be born into. Many of these variations are thought to be due to epigenetic mechanisms brought on by maternal environment such as stress, diet, gestational diabetes, and exposure to tobacco and alcohol. These factors are thought to be contributing factors to obesity and cardiovascular disease, neural tube defects, cancer, diabetes, etc. Studies to determine these epigenetic mechanisms are usually performed through laboratory studies of rodents and epidemiological studies of humans.\n\nKnowledge of maternal diet induced epigenetic changes is important not only for scientists, but for the general public. Perhaps the most obvious place of importance for maternal dietary effects is within the medical field. In the United States and worldwide, many non-communicable diseases, such as cancer, obesity, and heart disease, have reached epidemic proportions. The medical field is working on methods to detect these diseases, some of which have been discovered to be heavily driven by epigenetic alterations due to maternal dietary effects. Once the genomic markers for these diseases are identified, research can begin to be implemented to identify the early onset of these diseases and possibly reverse the epigenetic effects of maternal diet in later life stages. The reversal of epigenetic effects will utilize the pharmaceutical field in an attempt to create drugs which target the specific genes and genomic alterations. The creation of drugs to cure these non-communicable diseases could be used to treat individuals who already have these illnesses. General knowledge of the mechanisms behind maternal dietary epigenetic effects is also beneficial in terms of awareness. The general public can be aware of the risks of certain dietary behaviors during pregnancy in an attempt to curb the negative consequences which may arise in offspring later in their lives. Epigenetic knowledge can lead to an overall healthier lifestyle for the billions of people worldwide.\n\nThe effect of maternal diet in species other than humans is also relevant. Many of the long term effects of global climate change are unknown. Knowledge of epigenetic mechanisms can help scientists better predict the impacts of changing community structures on species which are ecologically, economically, and/or culturally important around the world. Since many ecosystems will see changes in species structures, the nutrient availability will also be altered, ultimately affecting the available food choices for reproducing females. Maternal dietary effects may also be used to improve agricultural and aquaculture practices. Breeders may be able to utilize scientific data to create more sustainable practices, saving money for themselves, as well as the consumers.\n\nHyperglycemia during pregnancy is thought to cause epigenetic changes in the leptin gene of newborns leading to a potential increased risk for obesity and heart disease. Leptin is sometimes known as the “satiety hormone” because it is released by fat cells to inhibit hunger. By studying both animal models and human observational studies, it has been suggested that a leptin surge in the perinatal period plays a critical role in contributing to long-term risk of obesity. The perinatal period begins at 22 weeks gestation and ends a week after birth.[34] DNA methylation near the leptin locus has been examined to determine if there was a correlation between maternal glycemia and neonatal leptin levels. Results showed that glycemia was inversely associated with the methylation states of LEP gene, which controls the production of the leptin hormone. Therefore, higher glycemic levels in mothers corresponded to lower methylation states in LEP gene in their children. With this lower methylation state, the LEP gene is transcribed more often, thereby inducing higher blood leptin levels. These higher blood leptin levels during the perinatal period were linked to obesity in adulthood, perhaps due to the fact that a higher “normal” level of leptin was set during gestation. Because obesity is a large contributor to heart disease, this leptin surge is not only correlated with obesity but also heart disease.\n\nHigh fat diets in utero are believed to cause metabolic syndrome. Metabolic syndrome is a set of symptoms including obesity and insulin resistance that appear to be related. This syndrome is often associated with type II diabetes as well as hypertension and atherosclerosis. Using mice models, researchers have shown that high fat diets in utero cause modifications to the adiponectin and leptin genes that alter gene expression; these changes contribute to metabolic syndrome. The adiponectin genes regulate glucose metabolism as well as fatty acid breakdown; however, the exact mechanisms are not entirely understood. In both human and mice models, adiponectin has been shown to add insulin-sensitizing and anti-inflammatory properties to different types of tissue, specifically muscle and liver tissue. Adiponectin has also been shown to increase the rate of fatty acid transport and oxidation in mice, which causes an increase in fatty acid metabolism. With a high fat diet during gestation, there was an increase in methylation in the promoter of the adiponectin gene accompanied by a decrease in acetylation. These changes likely inhibit the transcription of the adiponectin genes because increases in methylation and decreases in acetylation usually repress transcription. Additionally, there was an increase in methylation of the leptin promoter, which turns down the production of the leptin gene. Therefore, there was less adiponectin to help cells take up glucose and break down fat, as well as less leptin to cause a feeling of satiety. The decrease in these hormones caused fat mass gain, glucose intolerance, hypertriglyceridemia, abnormal adiponectin and leptin levels, and hypertension throughout the animal’s lifetime. However, the effect was abolished after three subsequent generations with normal diets. This study highlights the fact that these epigenetic marks can be altered in as many as one generation and can even be completely eliminated over time. This study highlighted the connection between high fat diets to the adiponectin and leptin in mice. In contrast, few studies have been done in humans to show the specific effects of high fat diets in utero on humans. However, it has been shown that decreased adiponectin levels are associated with obesity, insulin resistance, type II diabetes, and coronary artery disease in humans. It is postulated that a similar mechanism as the one described in mice may also contribute to metabolic syndrome in humans.\n\nIn addition, high fat diets cause chronic low-grade inflammation in the placenta, adipose, liver, brain, and vascular system. Inflammation is an important aspect of the bodies’ natural defense system after injury, trauma, or disease. During an inflammatory response, a series of physiological reactions, such as increased blood flow, increased cellular metabolism, and vasodilation, occur in order to help treat the wounded or infected area. However, chronic low-grade inflammation has been linked to long-term consequences such as cardiovascular disease, renal failure, aging, diabetes, etc. This chronic low-grade inflammation is commonly seen in obese individuals on high fat diets. In a mice model, excessive cytokines were detected in mice fed on a high fat diet. Cytokines aid in cell signaling during immune responses, specifically sending cells towards sites of inflammation, infection, or trauma. The mRNA of proinflammatory cytokines was induced in the placenta of mothers on high fat diets. The high fat diets also caused changes in microbiotic composition, which led to hyperinflammatory colonic responses in offspring. This hyperinflammatory response can lead to inflammatory bowel diseases such as Crohn’s disease or ulcerative colitis.[35] As previously mentioned, high fat diets in utero contribute to obesity; however, some proinflammatory factors, like IL-6 and MCP-1, are also linked to body fat deposition. It has been suggested that histone acetylation is closely associated with inflammation because the addition of histone deacetylase inhibitors has been shown to reduce the expression of proinflammatory mediators in glial cells. This reduction in inflammation resulted in improved neural cell function and survival. This inflammation is also often associated with obesity, cardiovascular disease, fatty liver, brain damage, as well as preeclampsia and preterm birth. Although it has been shown that high fat diets induce inflammation, which contribute to all these chronic diseases; it is unclear as to how this inflammation acts as a mediator between diet and chronic disease.\n\nA study done after the Dutch Hunger Winter of 1944-1945 showed that undernutrition during the early stages of pregnancy are associated with hypomethylation of the insulin-like growth factor II (IGF2) gene even after six decades. These individuals had significantly lower methylation rates as compared to their same sex sibling who had not been conceived during the famine. A comparison was done with children conceived prior to the famine so that their mothers were nutrient deprived during the later stages of gestation; these children had normal methylation patterns. The IGF2 stands for insulin-like growth factor II; this gene is a key contributor in human growth and development. IGF2 gene is also maternally imprinted meaning that the mother’s gene is silenced. The mother’s gene is typically methylated at the differentially methylated region (DMR); however, when hypomethylated, the gene is bi-allelically expressed. Thus, individuals with lower methylation states likely lost some of the imprinting effect. Similar results have been demonstrated in the Nr3c1 and Ppara genes of the offspring of rats fed on an isocaloric protein-deficient diet before starting pregnancy. This further implies that the undernutrition was the cause of the epigenetic changes. Surprisingly, there was not a correlation between methylation states and birth weight. This displayed that birth weight may not be an adequate way to determine nutritional status during gestation. This study stressed that epigenetic effects vary depending on the timing of exposure and that early stages of mammalian development are crucial periods for establishing epigenetic marks. Those exposed earlier in gestation had decreased methylation while those who were exposed at the end of gestation had relatively normal methylation levels. The offspring and descendants of mothers with hypomethylation were more likely to develop cardiovascular disease. Epigenetic alterations that occur during embryogenesis and early fetal development have greater physiologic and metabolic effects because they are transmitted over more mitotic divisions. In other words, the epigenetic changes that occur earlier are more likely to persist in more cells.\n\nIn another study, researchers discovered that perinatal nutrient restriction resulting in intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) contributes to diabetes mellitus type 2 (DM2). IUGR refers to the poor growth of the baby in utero. In the pancreas, IUGR caused a reduction in the expression of the promoter of the gene encoding a critical transcription factor for beta cell function and development. Pancreatic beta cells are responsible for making insulin; decreased beta cell activity is associated with DM2 in adulthood. In skeletal muscle, IUGR caused a decrease in expression of the Glut-4 gene. The Glut-4 gene controls the production of the Glut-4 transporter; this transporter is specifically sensitive to insulin. Thus, when insulin levels rise, more glut-4 transporters are brought to the cell membrane to increase the uptake of glucose into the cell. This change is caused by histone modifications in the cells of skeletal muscle that decrease the effectiveness of the glucose transport system into the muscle. Because the main glucose transporters are not operating at optimal capacity, these individuals are more likely to develop insulin resistance with energy rich diets later in life, contributing to DM2.\n\nFurther studies have examined the epigenetic changes resulting from a high protein/low carbohydrate diet during pregnancy. This diet caused epigenetic changes that were associated with higher blood pressure, higher cortisol levels, and a heightened Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis response to stress. Increased methylation in the 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 (HSD2), glucocorticoid receptor (GR), and H19 ICR were positively correlated with adiposity and blood pressure in adulthood. Glucocorticoids play a vital role in tissue development and maturation as well as having effects on metabolism. Glucocorticoids’ access to GR is regulated by HSD1 and HSD2. H19 is an imprinted gene for a long coding RNA (lncRNA), which has limiting effects on body weight and cell proliferation. Therefore, higher methylation rates in H19 ICR repress transcription and prevent the lncRNA from regulating body weight. Mothers who reported higher meat/fish and vegetable intake and lower bread/potato intake in late pregnancy had a higher average methylation in GR and HSD2. However, one common challenge of these types of studies is that many epigenetic modifications have tissue and cell-type specificity DNA methylation patterns. Thus, epigenetic modification patterns of accessible tissues, like peripheral blood, may not represent the epigenetic patterns of the tissue involved in a particular disease.\n\nStrong evidence in rats supports the conclusion that neonatal estrogen exposure plays a role in the development of prostate cancer. Using a human fetal prostate xenograft model, researchers studied the effects of early exposure to estrogen with and without secondary estrogen and testosterone treatment. A xenograft model is a graft of tissue transplanted between organisms of different species. In this case, human tissue was transplanted into rats; therefore, there was no need to extrapolate from rodents to humans. Histopathological lesions, proliferation, and serum hormone levels were measured at various time-points after xenografting. At day 200, the xenograft that had been exposed to two treatments of estrogen showed the most severe changes. Additionally, researchers looked at key genes involved in prostatic glandular and stromal growth, cell-cycle progression, apoptosis, hormone receptors, and tumor suppressors using a custom PCR array. Analysis of DNA methylation showed methylation differences in CpG sites of the stromal compartment after estrogen treatment. These variations in methylation are likely a contributing cause to the changes in the cellular events in the KEGG prostate cancer pathway that inhibit apoptosis and increase cell cycle progression that contribute to the development of cancer.\n\nIn utero or neonatal exposure to bisphenol A (BPA), a chemical used in manufacturing polycarbonate plastic, is correlated with higher body weight, breast cancer, prostate cancer, and an altered reproductive function. In a mice model, the mice fed on a BPA diet were more likely to have a yellow coat corresponding to their lower methylation state in the promoter regions of the retrotransposon upstream of the Agouti gene. The Agouti gene is responsible for determining whether an animal’s coat will be banded (agouti) or solid (non-agouti). However, supplementation with methyl donors like folic acid or phytoestrogen abolished the hypomethylating effect. This demonstrates that the epigenetic changes can be reversed through diet and supplementation.\n\nMaternal dietary effects are not just seen in humans, but throughout many taxa in the animal kingdom. These maternal dietary effects can result in ecological changes on a larger scale throughout populations and from generation to generation. The plasticity involved in these epigenetic changes due to maternal diet represents the environment into which the offspring will be born. Many times, epigenetic effects on offspring from the maternal diet during development will genetically prepare the offspring to be better adapted for the environment in which they will first encounter. The epigenetic effects of maternal diet can be seen in many species, utilizing different ecological cues and epigenetic mechanisms to provide an adaptive advantage to future generations.\n\nWithin the field of ecology, there are many examples of maternal dietary effects. Unfortunately, the epigenetic mechanisms underlying these phenotypic changes are rarely investigated. In the future, it would be beneficial for ecological scientists as well as epigenetic and genomic scientists to work together to fill the holes within the ecology field to produce a complete picture of environmental cues and epigenetic alterations producing phenotypic diversity.\n\nA pyralid moth species, \"Plodia interpunctella\", commonly found in food storage areas, exhibits maternal dietary effects, as well as paternal dietary effects, on its offspring. Epigenetic changes in moth offspring affect the production of phenoloxidase, an enzyme involved with melanization and correlated with resistance of certain pathogens in many invertebrate species. In this study, parent moths were housed in food rich or food poor environments during their reproductive period. Moths who were housed in food poor environments produced offspring with less phenoloxidase, and thus had a weaker immune system, than moths who reproduced in food rich environments. This is believed to be adaptive because the offspring develop while receiving cues of scarce nutritional opportunities. These cues allow the moth to allocate energy differentially, decreasing energy allocated for the immune system and devoting more energy towards growth and reproduction to increase fitness and insure future generations. One explanation for this effect may be imprinting, the expression of only one parental gene over the other, but further research has yet to be done.\n\nParental-mediated dietary epigenetic effects on immunity has a broader significance on wild organisms. Changes in immunity throughout an entire population may make the population more susceptible to an environmental disturbance, such as the introduction of a pathogen. Therefore, these transgenerational epigenetic effects can influence the population dynamics by decreasing the stability of populations who inhabit environments different from the parental environment that offspring are epigenetically modified for.\n\nFood availability also influences the epigenetic mechanisms driving growth rate in the mouthbrooding cichlid, \"Simochromis pleurospilus\". When nutrient availability is high, reproducing females will produce many small eggs, versus fewer, larger eggs in nutrient poor environments. Egg size often correlates with fish larvae body size at hatching: smaller larvae hatch from smaller eggs. In the case of the cichlid, small larvae grow at a faster rate than their larger egg counterparts. This is due to the increased expression of GHR, the growth hormone receptor. Increased transcription levels of GHR genes increase the receptors available to bind with growth hormone, GH, leading to an increased growth rate in smaller fish. Fish of larger size are less likely to be eaten by predators, therefore it is advantageous to grow quickly in early life stages to insure survival. The mechanism by which GHR transcription is regulated is unknown, but it may be due to hormones within the yolk produced by the mother, or just by the yolk quantity itself. This may lead to DNA methylation or histone modifications which control genic transcription levels.\n\nEcologically, this is an example of the mother utilizing her environment and determining the best method to maximize offspring survival, without actually making a conscious effort to do so. Ecology is generally driven by the ability of an organism to compete to obtain nutrients and successfully reproduce. If a mother is able to gather a plentiful amount of resources, she will have a higher fecundity and produce offspring who are able to grow quickly to avoid predation. Mothers who are unable to obtain as many nutrients will produce fewer offspring, but the offspring will be larger in hopes that their large size will help insure survival into sexual maturation. Unlike the moth example, the maternal effects provided to the cichlid offspring do not prepare the cichlids for the environment that they will be born into; this is because mouth brooding cichlids provide parental care to their offspring, providing a stable environment for the offspring to develop. Offspring who have a greater growth rate can become independent more quickly than slow growing counterparts, therefore decreasing the amount of energy spent by the parents during the parental care period.\n\nA similar phenomenon occurs in the sea urchin, \"Strongylocentrotus droebachiensis\". Urchin mothers in nutrient rich environments produce a large number of small eggs. Offspring from these small eggs grow at a faster rate than their large egg counterparts from nutrient poor mothers. Again, it is beneficial for sea urchin larvae, known as planula, to grow quickly to decrease the duration of their larval phase and metamorphose into a juvenile to decrease predation risks. Sea urchin larvae have the ability to develop into one of two phenotypes, based on their maternal and larval nutrition. Larvae who grow at a fast rate from high nutrition, are able to devote more of their energy towards development into the juvenile phenotype. Larvae who grow at a slower rate with low nutrition, devote more energy towards growing spine-like appendages to protect themselves from predators in an attempt to increase survival into the juvenile phase. The determination of these phenotypes is based on both the maternal and the juvenile nutrition. The epigenetic mechanisms behind these phenotypic changes is unknown, but it is believed that there may be a nutritional threshold that triggers epigenetic changes affecting development and, ultimately, the larval phenotype.\n\n", "id": "343457", "title": "Maternal effect"}
