[{"url":"https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55216685","text":"Opaline gland\n\nSea hares are gastropods without hard shells to protect them, thus they engage in other anti predatory behaviors. They have several defense mechanisms all of which have a chemical basis. They expel ink as their primary form of defense, in addition to that, their skin and digestive track are toxic to predators. The ink serves to cloud the predator's vision as well as halt their senses temporarily, however because sea hares are slow their colorful expulsion has to do more than that in order to ensure that they escape successful, the ink serves a third function which is the mimicking of food. They are also seen to change their feeding behaviours for a short period of time in response to averse stimuli.\n\nThe diet of Sea hares enable them to gain the chemicals present in their Ink, they also determine the color of their ink. They have adapted over time to feed mainly on seaweed and algae as without their specific diet they will be left without ink and eventually falling prey to predators. The species they feed on determine the strength of their chemical defense. Individuals that feed on Red Algae, plocamium were found to have better defense than those that fed on green algae, ulva lactuca.\n\nThe Ink glad and Opaline gland produce ink and Opaline which are mixed in the cavity and expelled towards the predator.The ink and opaline are highly concentrated with Free amino acids and ammonium, these chemicals present are responsible  for the response of the predators since the predators have receptive sites for them. The ink has been seen to stimulate appetitive and ingestive behaviours while Opaline does a similar thing although it differs in the sense that it inhibits ingestion.\n\nPhagomimicry is the instance where fluids mimic the feeling of food, deceiving organisms to eat said fluid. In the case of sea hares the ink produced deceive their predators to attack their ink instead of pursuing the sea hare. This is possible because the fluid expelled by the sea hare is a mixture of both Opaline and Ink. Both chemicals contain high levels of free amino acids and ammonium, these compounds are the very ones present in their predators food. The levels of the compound present in the Opaline-Ink mixture are very similar to those of their predators, as a result when the mixture is expelled in the presence of their predator, they are deceived into attacking the mixture and feeding on it. This gives the sea hare an opportunity to escape. this was confirmed in a study investigating Spine-headed lobsters' response to sea hare ink.\n\nThe chemicals produced don't only function at repelling the predators, they also affect the nervous system of the predators. The Ink produced trigger aversive response in the predator. For Instance, sea anemones, shrivel up when they come in contact with the Ink.\n","id":"55216685","title":"Opaline gland"}]
